AGE 101: Introduction to Agriculture (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
The students will be able to:
1. acquire fundamental concepts and principles of land resources focusing towards
development and production in a sustainable manner appropriate in Nigeria;
2. demonstrate basic competencies in the management of land resources and food
production;
3. acquire basic skills, knowledge and attitude to manage a sustainable food production
enterprise or qualify for entry-level employment in an agriculture related agency;
4. acquire a sound scientific background that will allow transfer to a higher degree program
related to land resources and food systems;
5. describe the historical development in agriculture;
6. describe how to manage the natural resources in a sustainable manner; identify and
explain the major plant parts and functions and manage a home garden; and
7. describe the nutritional requirement of animals, and how to best maintain animal health
and demonstrate management practices.
Course Contents
The definition of agriculture. World population and food supply. History, scope and importance
of agriculture to man. Agriculture and natural environment. Characteristic features of tropical
agriculture and how they affect production. Land use and tenure. Trends in the production,
distribution and utilization of agricultural products. Measures of improving Nigerian Agriculture.
Climatic, edaphic and social factors in relation to crop production and distributions in Nigeria.
Systems of crop farming. Types, distribution and significance of farm animals; basic principles
of animal farming. Place of forestry, fish farming and wildlife in Agriculture.

AGE 102: Practical Farm Work 1 (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcome
At end of the course, students should be able to:
1. develop competent agricultural skills with ethical standards in their commitment to develop
their respective agricultural sectors;
2. demonstrate scientific knowledge and skills of a prospective entrepreneur;
3. recognize the value and develop awareness in preserving diversities of the environment;
and
4. effectively deliver relevant extension services providing quality services and assistance to
agriculture sectors.
Course Contents
Practical approaches to acquisition of skills needed in the production of crops including
selection of farmland, land clearing, pre-planting operations, cultural practices, harvesting,
preservation and storage, collection, identification and preservation of specimens of weeds,
plant pests, and diseases in the locality, rearing of animals should be emphasized– poultry,
goats, snails and others. Experience in fish production and processing of crop products like
palp, cassava, flour and others. should be emphasized. Assessment should be through process,
product evaluation to show what students have learnt in the farm.

AGE 103: Farm Biometrics (2 Units; C) (LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcome
On completion of the course, students are able to:
1. function independent in the chosen field of agricultural research specialization;
2. analyze complex processes at different spatial and temporal scales;
3. search and evaluate scientific literature; and
4. synthesize scientific information and research results, and communicate research results
to both scientists and non-scientists.
Course Contents
Definitions and varying applications of Farm Biometrics. The basic Mathematical concepts that
have uses in agricultural education including measurement in agriculture, seed rate,
percentages, area, volume, simultaneous and geometry, graphs, and their mathematical
application in agriculture.

AGE 124: Farm Technology (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. describe methods and plant diseases in field crop production;
2. Practice animal breeding and different feeding methods;
3. describe human-environment-agriculture relations and problems;
4. make the connection between natural resources and agricultural input;
5. demonstrates basic knowledge of the use of ICT in agriculture;
6. participate in activities in crop production under the supervision of an agricultural
engineer; and
7. use technology in agricultural activities under the supervision of an agricultural engineer.
Course Contents
The concepts and details of farm technology, need for farm mechanization, sources of farm
power, farm implements and equipment – plough, harrow, cultivator; tractor – internal
combustion engine, engine systems, mechanisms of two and four stroke engines, description
and operation processes. Tillage equipment and machines and how they function. Crop
protection equipment, crop harvesting and the associated equipment and tools. Spraying
machines, description and operations, processing equipment/machines, maintenance of farm
equipment and machines, economizes of agricultural mechanization.

AGE 201: Principles of Farmstead Planning (2 Units; C) (LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcome
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. determine the area of farm land;
2. explain the hydrology of the land;
3. enable the will be farmer have security over his farm land;
4. adds to the will be farmers’ security against intruders;
5. secures the boundaries of his land;
6. list the various uses of land; and
7. identify the basis for farm design.
Course Contents
Introduction to the concept of school land survey, Type of farm survey, principles and purpose
of soil survey, Procedures of Soil Survey, Soil Survey Report, Methods of Soil Surveys, Kinds
of Soil Survey, Techniques Used in Land Survey, Users of Soil Survey, photographs in soil
survey, soil survey report writings and farmstead planning, tools and equipment involved
farmstead planning, problems and prospects of land surveying and factors to consider when
planning a school farm layout. factors to consider in location and selection school farm. Basic
principles in the management of the school farm, differences between a school farm and a
commercial and or traditional farm; agricultural activities on the school farm; maintenance
operations in the school farm and transfer of experiences from school farm to improve
agricultural outputs of community.

AGE 202: Introduction to Soil Education (2 Units; C) (LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain how the environment influences plant growth and crop yields, and ways to modify
the environment to improve plant growth and yields;
2. identify soil types and will be able to identify ways to improve soil fertility as well as reduce
soil erosion and improve water quality and availability;
3. identify how soil are formed and ways to modify soil structure and drainage to reduce
erosion and improve water quality and water availability to plants; and
4. determined soil fertility and how plant nutrient deficiencies are identified, and means of
improving soil fertility and adding nutrients for plant growth.
Course Contents
Soils, their origin and formation. Physical properties of soils. Soil moisture, Soil air and Soil
temperature, soil classification and Soil survey. Soil colloids; soil reactions. Soil organic matter
and soil organisms; soil and water conservation; Nutrient requirements and mineral nutrition
of plants. Introduction to fertilizer (organic and Inorganic).

AGE 203: Forest Management Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcome
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. demonstrate the complex interactions of humans and forest ecosystems in a global
context;
2. exhibit forest mensuration skills and techniques for ecological measurements;
3. demonstrate quantitative and analytical skills for data collection, analysis, and
interpretation of forest ecology and management;
4. independently locate and apply relevant forest ecology and management literature to
assigned problems or research and management issues; and
5. interpret forest conservation, forest ecology, and resource management conflicts and
solutions from multiple perspectives ranging from private landowners to industry and
public lands.
Course Contents
The basic concepts of forest and their management strategies. Renewable natural resources,
availability, distribution and potential. The important forest trees and wildlife (with emphasis
on Nigerian spices). Classification, morphology and distribution of important forest trees.
Forest and game reserves in Nigeria. Silviculture; afforestation, characteristics of major timber
and their uses. Felling and log transportation.

AGE 204: Anatomy and Physiology of Farm Animals (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcome
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. apply concepts of breeding, physiology, nutrition, herd-health, economics and
management into practical and profitable animal production programs;
2. explain the role of nutrition in animal production;
3. explain the mechanisms and role of reproductive physiology in livestock production;
4. develop feeding systems for farm animal production and companion animals;
5. demonstrate critical thinking and problem solving skills as they apply scientific principles
to a variety of animal production systems; and
6. explain the application of modern animal production technologies and management
practices impact their production facilities, their communities and the world.
Course Contents
Introduce students to topographical and descriptive terms used in gross anatomy such as
caudal, distal, medial, planter and bones of different animals and their important joints, types
of muscles in the body of mammals and avian, digestive system of avian. An in-depth study
of the heart, blood vessels and lymphatic systems of mammals and avian, structures of the
urinary systems of mammals and avians, structure of nervous system of mammals and avians,
structure of the eyes, ears, of mammals and avian and the structure of the skin, hoof and
feather.

AGE 205: Introduction to Agricultural Economics (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcome
After studying all materials and resources presented in this course, the student will be able to:
1. describe fundamental macro- and micro-economic principles;
2. apply economic principles to agricultural production, marketing and consumption; and
3. describe the different agricultural economics fields (such as food industry, demand
theory, supply theory, competitive environments).
Course Contents
The concepts and details of: The scope and methodology of economics, Demand and supply.
Concept of elasticity. Concept of utility and indifference curves, Factors influencing consumers’
behaviour. Concepts of production and cost functions. Effects of laws of diminishing return in
the production process. Theory of cost in the short-and –long term. The process of determining
the optimum level of in-put, The elements of market structure, Pricing and output policies of
a monopoly firm. Pricing and output policies of a typical firm in an imperfect market egg 1)
monopolistic competition and 2) oligopoly.

AGE 206: Teaching Vocational Agriculture in Schools (2 Units C LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcome
At the end of the course students will be able to
1. implement the philosophy and utilize instructional methods used in agricultural education
settings;
2. plan and organize units of instruction for topics in agriculture;
3. develop and use teaching plans on agriculture topics for traditional and special needs
students;
4. effectively manage a diverse population of students;
5. prepare effective tests which will allow them to evaluate and grade students in
agricultural education;
6. demonstrate the ability to effectively utilize a variety of teaching techniques and
strategies in the classroom in order to positively influence student learning; and
7. demonstrate skills in individualized assessment, instructional planning, and data-based
decision-making through satisfactory completion of all checkpoints prior to student
teaching.
Course Contents
Teaching Unit, Teaching Sequence, Modules of Instruction in Crop Production, Modules of
Instruction in Animal Production. Methods of Teaching Vocational Agriculture, Discussion
Techniques, Laboratory Experience, Demonstrations. Young and adult farmer courses in
school, Objectives of Courses, Types of Courses, Organizing Young and Adult Farmer Course,
Developing Course Contents for Young and Adult Farmers. Organization and supervision of
school farm. Management of school farm. Practical teaching on the land laboratory. Record
keeping in the school farm. Responsibilities of farm supervisors. Developing manipulative skills.
Instruction on the farm. Conducting an agriculture class. Analysis of farm accounts and
records. Adjusting the accounts for inter farm comparison. Definition of input and output
terms. Calculation outputs, costs. Calculation of performance measures. Factors affecting the
level of output. Gross margin analysis.

AGE 207: Techniques of Vegetable Crop Production (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcome
At the end of the course students will be able to
1. identify plant vegetative and reproductive structures;
2. understand basic principles, processes and functions of plant growth and reproduction,
including photosynthesis, respiration, transpiration, vegetative growth and reproductive
growth, fertilization and fruit formation;
3. understand factors affecting the need to find sustainable practices for production of food,
feed and fiber crops and how to implement and evaluate them; and
4. understand how to propagate plant, sustainably grow, manage and harvest a variety of
plants in a diverse set of environmental, marketing, and financial conditions.
Course Contents
This course should expose students to the basic concepts of agriculture with details in
vegetable crop production. Vegetable and Mankind, gardening; type pf gardening. Fruit and
vegetables in the tropics. Orchard/garden layout; preparation of seed bed, nursery practices.
Vocation and layout of orchard/garden. Factors of vegetable and fruits production. Types and
classes of common fruits and vegetable grown. Consumer vegetable growing. Diseases and
pests of vegetable and fruits.

AGE 208: Farm Tools and Equipment (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcome
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain why agricultural machinery and equipment are important;
2. identify different areas of agriculture where machinery and equipment are used; and
3. describe some of the different types of agricultural machinery and equipment used for
crop production.
Course Contents
Identification of simple farm tools and their uses, Materials for farm tools and equipment
production. Types of farm tools – garden tools, tillage tools, harvesting tools, differences
between tools and equipment. Types of school farm equipment – spraying equipment,
harvesting equipment and storage equipment. Use and maintenance of various tools and
equipment. Types of farm machines, Maintenance of each like predictive, preventive,
corrective and routine maintenance.

AGE 301: Horticulture Education (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course students will be able to
1. identify plant vegetative and reproductive structures;
2. Identify the basic principles, processes and functions of plant growth and reproduction,
including photosynthesis, respiration, transpiration, vegetative growth and reproductive
growth, fertilization and fruit formation;
3. explain how the environment influences plant growth and crop yields, and ways to modify
the environment to improve plant growth and yields;
4. describe the factors affecting the need to find sustainable practices for production of
food, feed and fiber crops and how to implement and evaluate them;
5. identify many of the commonly used herbaceous and woody ornamental plants and how
to propagate, establish and care for them; and
6. list and explain the nutritive value of fruits, nuts and vegetables in the human diet.
Course Content
Classification and importance of vegetable crops, ecological distribution of vegetables and
fruits in Nigeria. Varieties and adaptation of exotic vegetables and fruits to the Nigerian
environment. Types and systems of vegetable and fruit production. Production processes of
tropical fruit crops. Methods of plant propagation. Important forest trees and Ornamental
plants production. Cultivation of leaf, fruit, and root vegetables. Establishment of ornamental
garden and principles of landscaping.

AGE 302: Ruminant Animal Production (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students will be able to:
1. quantify the economic impact of the beef, dairy, sheep and goat industries;
2. describe an overview of the domestic and international dairy, beef, sheep and goat
industries;
3. compare and contrast purebred versus commercial ruminant livestock segments;
4. list primary facilities and equipment required for ruminant livestock production;
5. compare and contrast the performance and selection of ruminant breeds; 6.
compare and contrast the genetic ad selection tools available to breeders.
7. discuss selection for improved productivity;
8. analyze the various types of ruminant livestock systems; and
9. compare and contrast profitable and unprofitable ruminant livestock systems.
Course Contents
The concepts and details of conformation, types and breeds of sheep, goats, beef, cattle, and
dairy cattle in Nigeria. Establishment of different classes of sheep, goat, beef and dairy cattle
herd. Feed ingredients and how to feed ruminants. Breeding/reproduction of ruminant animals.
Types of buildings and equipment used in ruminant enterprises. Milking techniques and
processing. How to care/manage Young ruminants from day old to welcoming. Common diseases
and parasites of sheep, goat, beef and dairy cattle. How to slaughter and market sheep, goat
and cattle

AGE 303: Agricultural Marketing (2 Units C) (LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students will be able to:
1. describe the agricultural marketing system;
2. explain the role of price discovery in our economic system;
3. describe the Value added processing;
4. clarify Competition in the market place;
5. enlighten Consumers on demand issues;
6. explain Food marketing management;
7. illuminate Marketing margin and
8. expound Marketing functions
Course Contents
The basic concepts in agricultural marketing, marketing functions, marketing agencies,
Application of economic principles of demand and supply of agricultural marketing. They should
also be exposed to the role of market Price in agricultural, application of the principles of
elasticity to agricultural marketing, the application of the theory of consumer behaviour to how
buyers behave in demand for food commodities, application of the different market structure
and marketing, principles of the theories and institutions or international trade.

AGE 304: Technology of Breeding Crop (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
1. identify characteristics of self- and cross-pollinated plants;
2. identify sources of genetic variation to conduct a breeding program;
3. determine breeding methodology appropriate for plants with different mating systems;
4. conduct basic statistical analyses related to plant breeding;
5. analyze journal articles related to cultivar development:
6. conduct and analyze a selection experiment: and
7. communicate background information and original ideas related to breeding a specific
crop.
Course Contents
The basic concepts of agricultural crops in relation to the technologies of their breeding. What
is Crop Breeding? Purpose of Breeding and Biological Variation. Introduction of Plant Cell, Cell
Division (mitosis), Gametogenesis (meiosis) and Fertilization in Plant. Gene, Symbols and
Terminology. Mendel’s Experiment, Law of Inheritance and use of Chi-square Calculations.
Qualitative Vs Quantitative Traits, Heritability. Selection Responses. Methods of Sexual
Reproduction in Crop Plants: Reproduction in Crop Plants, Self-Incompatibility and Male
Sterility, steps for Controlled Crosses and Sourcing for Breeding Materials. Methods of Breeding
Self Pollinated Crops: Pure-line Selection, Mass Selection, Hybridization. Breeding
Methodologies for Cross Pollinated Crops: Mass Selection, Recurrent Selection, Hybrid Varieties
Development (in Maize), Synthetic Varieties (in Maize), Seed Production and Distribution.

AGE 305: Farm Business Management Education (2 Unit C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course students will be able to
1. recognize and examine the relationships between inputs and outputs in their agricultural
field to make effective and profitable decisions;
2. effectively evaluate the impact of trade policy, common markets, trading blocks, market
instability, commodity problems, trade agreements and environmental regulations on
imports and exports in international trade to be able to improve production decision
making;
3. explain how all aspects of agriculture combine and are used by scientists, marketers,
and producers; and
4. explain how employer characteristics and decision-making at various levels enhances the
success of an agricultural enterprise.
Course Contents
The nature of farm business management, the functional divisions in business management,
the different organizations and topologies of farm business, application and management
principles of farm organizations and operations, the concept of farm labour productivity, how
to acquire and use farm resources, how to acquire land for farm business operations, economic
climate and business problems in Nigeria and how to acquire capital and credit for farm
business operations.

AGE 306: Introduction to Animal Breeding (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcome
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. demonstrate competence of applied subject associated with all areas of animal breeding,
genetics, and selection;
2. exhibit problem solving skills based on quantitative and analytical reasoning;
3. demonstrate effective communication skills; and
4. exhibit leadership and other interpersonal skills needed for career placement and
advancement.
Course Contents
The basic concepts of animal breeding. Reproduction in farm animal, breeding management
and practices to improve breeding efficiency. Management of sires for breeding, detecting
female in it, artificial insemination pregnancy and care of expected mothers and after
parturition, genes and mode of actions, inheritance of economic traits, variation, method of
selection. System of breeding; progeny and performance testing. Agricultural Education
distribution of Nigerian and foreign breeds of livestock.

AGE 307: Field and Tree Crop Production (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course students will be able to
1. explain sustainable practices for production of food, feed and fiber crops and how to
implement and evaluate them;
2. apply their knowledge to solve problems related to plant growth, crop production and
natural resource management;
3. explain how crop science relates to the economy and environment, both currently and
in the future;
4. critically evaluate public information related to crop science as being scientifically-based
or opinion-based and contribute to the knowledge base of information;
5. write in a style appropriate for technical or informative publications for various audiences
related to crop science; and
6. demonstrate supervised, hands-on work experience related to crop production.
Course Contents
The basic concepts of agriculture, with specifics reference made to field crop production.
History, distribution, soil and climatic requirement, improved varieties, production practices,
harvesting and economic aspect of cereals, legumes and tuber crops. Different types of
economic tree crops in Nigeria, their origin and areas of production. The different varieties and
morphological characteristics of local tree crops in Nigeria. The cultivation and management
of Nigeria tree crops. Methods of harvesting, handling and processing of tree crops in Nigeria.
Different types of economic tree crops in Nigeria, their origin and areas of production. The
different varieties and morphological characteristics of local tree crops in Nigeria. The
cultivation and management of Nigeria tree crops. Methods of harvesting, handling and
processing of tree crops in Nigeria

AGE 308: Fish Farming and Management (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course students will be able to
1. explain the basis of technologies of fisheries and aquaculture;
2. list and discuss the principle, importance, purpose and application;
3. explain the conditions of development of aquatic organisms and its habitat conditions,
formation and change patterns of yielding in relate with the environmental changes of
anthropogenic influence;
4. explain the fisheries and aquaculture schemes used in breeding, rearing and feeding
technologies in farms, their purpose and principles of application, be aware of the
fisheries and aquaculture design and construction principles, taking into account the
legislation and directives;
5. describe the fisheries and aquaculture business management features, methods, and
strategies for aquaculture business development, operational funding, fisheries and
aquaculture production innovation and marketing issues and strategies;
6. apply traditional research methods, scientific literature, information technologies and
statistical methods of calculation to perform and summarize the research and creative
use results of analysis by preparation of the final thesis and oral presentations;
7. apply modern equipment in laboratories, special computer programs for design of
fisheries and aquaculture farms by implementation of innovative ideas for management
of farms;
8. describe the fisheries and aquaculture technological processes, identify problems and
solve them, relate agriculture activity and aquaculture productivity and safety, analyze
and evaluate effects of the fisheries and aquaculture on the environment, to provide the
preventive safety measures;
9. apply methods and techniques used in fisheries and aquaculture design and construction,
their management methods and quality assurance principles;
10. solve the technological challenges related to management of fisheries and aquaculture
farms; organize activities to ensure their entrepreneurship and competitiveness; and
11. to critically and logically contemplate, to have a reasoned opinion and be able to defend
it, to gather and present scientific information to different audiences.
Course Contents
The important fishes of West Africa with emphasis on Nigerian species. Classification,
evolution, morphology and basic structure of fishes. The adaptation of fish to aquatic life. Life
cycle of principal species of fishes. Significance of fishes in the diet of Nigerians. The fish
industries in Nigeria. Fundamental Principles of fish management and production. Types of
common fishing gears, type of environment suitable for the school fish pond and its
characteristics. How to construct and manage fish farm, harvesting and preservation of fish.

AGE 309: Techniques of Non-Ruminant Animal Production (2 Units C: LH 15; PH
45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course students will be able to
1. identify methods of rearing chicken;
2. acquire knowledge and skill of complete package of practice for quality production of
broilers;
3. explain how to produce table and hatchable eggs; and
4. discuss the skill involved in caring and management of chicks.
Course Contents
The concepts and details of different types of housing and equipment for poultry, wine and
rabbit. The management of non-ruminant animals. Diseases and parasites of poultry, wine and
rabbit. Means and methods of transporting poultry, wine and rabbit from the farm to the
market. Various methods of processing poultry, swine and rabbit. Exposure to the
establishment and management techniques of non-ruminant animals

AGE 310: Introduction to Farm Machinery and Mechanization (2 Units C: LH
15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course students will be able to
1. acquire a sound knowledge in the study of agricultural power and machinery in order to
facilitates their interest in agricultural engineering;
2. acquire the skill of identifying suitable materials with adequate illustrations based on
local problems and issues that affect tropical agriculture;
3. discuss various power sources available for agricultural work;
4. select, use, repair and maintain appropriate agricultural machinery; and
5. acquire knowledge that will be highly useful in running an Agro Service Centre for farm
machinery.
Course Contents
Basic machines and their applications in agricultural mechanization. Agricultural Workshop
tools and their uses. Principles of internal combustion engine (ICE). Farm machinery used for
tillage: ploughs, harrows, and cultivators. Adjustment, maintenance, and repair of farm
tractors and equipment. Farm power transmission system. Review of farm power sources.
Transmission of power in farm machinery. Tractor power outlets. Tractor mechanics and power
measurements. Tractor test and test codes. Ergonomics considerations. Hitches and hitch
systems. Operations and maintenance of farm machinery. Field evaluation and cost analysis
of use of agricultural machines. Criteria for replacement.

AGE 401: Water and Land Conservation Education (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcome
At the end of the course students will be able to 1.
identify soil types and how they are formed:
2. develop ways to modify soil structure and drainage to reduce erosion and improve water
quality;
3. determined soil fertility;
4. demonstrate the ways of improving soil fertility; and
5. develop ways of adding nutrients for plant growth.
Course Contents
The importance of soil conservation in increasing crop production. The scope of soil and water
engineering. The application of the concepts of hydrology and meteorology to soil and water
conservation. The consumptive use of water by crops. The application of the principle of runoff
in conservation measures. The various methods of soil and water conservation and their
limitations. Principles of infiltration and percolation. Characteristics of ground water. The uses
of hydrograph. Various forms of fluid flow in pipes and open cannel. Forces on plane and
submerged surfaces

AGE 402: Husbandry of Ruminant Animals (2 Units C) (LH 15; PH 45) Learning
Outcome
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the management principles involved in the rearing of ruminant animals;
2. identify the age at puberty, sexing ratio and care of the young ruminants;
3. identify some of the local and exotic breed of ruminant animals;
4. compare the anatomical structure of the gastro-intestinal tract of ruminant animals; and
5. differentiate the housing types for the different classes of ruminant animals.
Course Contents
The basic concepts of agriculture with specifics on animal husbandry of ruminant animals.
Especially the beef and dairy industry; Feeding and Management of Cattle, Sheep and Goats;
Housing and equipment; Calf-rearing; growing and finishing operations; Milk production,
handling and processing. Characteristics of Ruminant Animals. General Features of Ruminant
Animals. Digestive Anatomy of Ruminants. Breeds of Ruminant Animals (Cattle, Sheep and
Goat). Management of Ruminant Breeding Stock (Cattle, Sheep and Goats). Housing and
Equipment for Cattle Production. Housing for Sheep and Goat Production. Equipment and
Management Practices for Ruminant Production. Nutrient Requirements and Feeding of
Ruminants. Feeding Materials for Ruminants. Diseases of Ruminants and Their Preventive
Measures. Internal Parasites of Ruminants and Their Control Measures. External Parasites of
Ruminants and Their Control Measures.

AGE 403: Livestock Health Education (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course students will be able to:
1. discuss health protection and safeguard of the wellbeing of animals;
2. elucidate veterinary care such as preventive medicine;
3. demonstrate reproduction management, surveillance, eradication;
4. explain monitory programs on animal diseases;
5. list and explain methods of treatment of animal waste; and
6. obtain hands-on experience and problem-solving skills that will assist them while
developing careers related to animal health.
Course Contents
The study of the principles of livestock health including aetiology, symptoms, effects,
prevention and control of diseases of the parasites of the following livestock: poultry, cattle,
sheep, goat, pig and rabbits. Good Hygiene Practice: Cleaning, Disinfection, Sanitation, Animal
Health Management Effect of Environment on Animal Function and Performance; Animal
Housing Requirements, and Animal Welfare Aspects. Animal Disease Management (Biosecurity
Measures, Management of Pregnant and Lactating Animals). Classification of Animal Diseases
– Study of Major Diseases. Parasitic Diseases. Diseases and Disorders of Lactating Cow
(Mastitis, Udder Edema, Dystokia, Milk Fever, Ketosis), and Calves (Pneumonia, Diarrhea).
Poultry Diseases. Waste, Carcasses Disposal.

AGE 404: Entrepreneurship in Agriculture (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcome
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. develop the typology of Agricultural entrepreneurial firms;
2. develop framework of entrepreneurial venture;
3. make SWOT analysis for an entrepreneur;
4. generation, incubation and commercialization of ideas and innovations;
5. role of MSME in Agricultural entrepreneurship development;
6. identify steps of becoming a successful Agricultural entrepreneur; 7. develop a
good Communication skill among Agricultural entrepreneurs; and
8. develop some Models of entrepreneurship.
Course Contents
Introduction to the process of entrepreneurship within the agricultural and food sectors.
Emphasis on opportunity recognition and assessment, resource acquisition and feasibility
analysis for both private and social enterprises. Forms and types of Agricultural entrepreneur,
Motivation and entrepreneurship, Theories of entrepreneurship, Institutional support for
Agricultural entrepreneurship development, Venture capital, Public private partnership,
Overview of Agricultural input industry, Case studies of entrepreneurs. Students will develop
a comprehensive feasibility study for a new Agricultural business or non-profit organization.

AGE 405: Livestock Nutrition Education (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcome
At the end of the course students will be able to:
1. demonstrate the role of nutrition in animal production;
2. develop feeding systems for farm animal production and companion animals;
3. demonstrate critical thinking and problem solving skills as they apply scientific principles
to a variety of animal production systems; and
4. explain the application of modern animal production technologies and management
practices impact their production facilities, their communities and the world.
Course Contents
Classification and function of nutrients, digestive processes, characterization of feedstuffs, and
formulation of diets for domestic animals. Importance, sources, deficiency symptoms of the
following classes of livestock feed: water, carbohydrate, protein, vitamins, minerals, fat/oil,
nutritional requirements of livestock, their measurement, type of ratio formulation to be
treated. Feedstuff analysis and evaluation. Feed classification. Concentrates: cereal grains, byproduct feeds. Concentrates: protein feeds, miscellaneous. Balancing rations, Principles, Nonruminant applications. Method applied to some ruminant rations. Feeding Swine and Poultry.
Forages: Grasses, Legumes, Residue feeds. Forage Intake and Factors affecting Dry Matter
Intake (i.e., Feed Consumption). Forages: harvest forms; pasture, hay, silage.

AGE 406: Poultry Production Education (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcome
At the end of the course students will be able to:
1. deal responsibly with the management aspects of the production system; acquires basic
knowledge of genetic selection of commercial hybrids;
2. apply the techniques of artificial incubation of eggs;
3. explain the management of the rearing environment;
4. explain laying hens and chicken meat;
5. discuss the different feeding phases of the birds; and
6. discuss the issues related to welfare and animal protection legislation.
Course Contents
The concepts, scope and purpose, system of production, equipment and management
practices involved in growers, broilers, breeders and layers production. Building and
equipment; incubation and hatchery management of poultry eggs; turkey, geese, duck and
guinea fowl production. The application of the principles of feeding, housing, care, breeding
and management as basis for successful production. Carcass cuts in poultry and measures of
carcass quality. Marketing of poultry products.

AGE 407: Forestry and Wild Life Conservation (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcome
At the end of the course students will be able to:
1. identify native and non-native herbaceous and woody plants;
2. appreciate the general principles of ecology as how they related to terrestrial and/or
aquatic plant and animal conservation and management;
3. identify species, characteristics, habitat requirements and life cycles of birds, fish and/or
mammalian wildlife species;
4. solve problems related to wildlife conservation and management;
5. explain the factors affecting the need to find sustainable practices for production of food,
feed and fiber crops and how to implement them;
6. be competent in basic forest management principles and evaluation of forest stands for
health, wildlife habitat and lumber use;
7. apprehend how the environment influences plant growth and crop yields, and ways to
modify the environment to improve plant growth and yields;
8. realize how to propagate, plant, and sustainably grow, manage and harvest grain or
forage crops within various environmental, marketing and financial conditions;
9. explain how wildlife conservation and management relates to the economy and
environment, both currently and in the future; and
10. critically evaluate current events and public information related to wildlife conservation
and management as being scientifically-based or opinion-based and contribute to the
knowledge base of information.
Course Contents
Harvesting, processing and marketing of timber and other forest produce. Forest insects &
disease. Global forest resources. Natural forests and plantations in Africa. Forestry systems
(natural, multipurpose forests, plantation forestry, agroforestry). Sustainable forestry
development policy and legislation. Silviculture and management of plantations. Forest
certification. Effects of site and Silviculture on wood quality. Forest harvesting, utilization and
forest wood products. Non-timber forest products of natural and plantation forests. Forests
and woodlands management. Environmental management of natural and plantation forests.
Forestry research. Human resource management in forestry. Organization of wildlife resources.
Wildlife in relation to their environment. Factors affecting the distribution and abundance of
wildlife. Interrelationship between climate, soil, vegetation, geologic history and wildlife
population characteristics as related to re-production and mortality factors. Movement,
behaviours, lifecycles, reproduction, food and food habits of wildlife. Nature and efficient
usage of rangeland in West Africa. Methods of range assessment and management.

AGE 408: Animal Products Handling, Processing and Storage (2 Units C: LH 15;
PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain how the animal processing industry has evolved;
2. identify career opportunities related to animal processing;
3. explain the economic importance of animal processing;
4. describe how processing affects the value of the product;
5. apply principles of comparative anatomy and physiology to uses within various animal
systems;
6. comply with government regulations and safety standards for facilities used in animal
production;
7. work effectively with industry organizations, groups and regulatory agencies affecting
the food products and processing industry;
8. implement procedures to ensure that animal products are safe;
9. apply safety and sanitation procedures in the handling, processing and storing of food
products; and
10. demonstrate worker safety procedures with food product and processing equipment and
facilities.
Course Contents
Definition of animal products technology. Importance of animal products technology. Definition
of storage. General guiding principles in storage. Types of storage. Merits and demerits.
Methods of improvement of storage. Storage losses and factors. Slaughtering techniques,
dressing and dressing percentages. Meat types. Methods of preservation of meat, poultry,
eggs, milk and milk products such as smoking, salting, freezing, drying, and others.
Preparation for slaughtering, evisceration; care of carcass and its cuts; processing and care of
hides, skin and wool; processing and storage of meat; milk processing and microbiology; and
poultry products. Milk hygiene; Effect of cooking on meat and milk flavour. Post-harvest
physiology of animal products; egg quality and grading chemistry and nutritive value of meat
and eggs. Poultry products; milk by-products-butter, cheese and whey; preparation and
storage of beef products – bacon, sausage and ham; food additives; flavours and aroma.
Marketing and distribution of animal products. (1 hour of lectures and 3 hours of practical per
week).
