BED 114: Financial Accounting for Business Educators I (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. explain the concept of accounting;
2. explain the history and development of accounting;
3. describe the structure of International Accounting Standard Board (IASB) and its
conceptual framework;
4. identify source documents;
5. demonstrate knowledge of the principles of double entry book-keeping; and
6. prepare cash books, and bank reconciliation statement and statement of a sale trader.
Course Contents
Introduction to business and accounting. IASB conceptual framework. Accounting Equation.
Sales and Purchases. Non-Current assets and depreciation. Bad and doubtful debts. Accruals
and Prepayments. Source document. Subsidiary books of accounts. Classification of accounts.
Principles of double entry book-keeping. Cashbook. Bank reconciliation statement. End of year
adjustment. Preparation of statement of a sale trader.
BED 121: Office Administration and Management (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. demonstrate knowledge of the principles of office management;
2. highlight types of office organization;
3. state the advantages and disadvantages of each method of office organizations; 4.
state the procedures for effective office management; and
5. explain the theories of motivation and job specification.
Course Contents
The development of management thought. Management theories. Organization and
managers. The mix of work and managers. Management principles. The manager and his
environment. Principles of office management. Types of office organization. Approaches to
organizational design. Method of office organizations. Procedures for effective office
management. Leadership. Motivation. Organizational change.
BED 122: Business Mathematics (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. apply symbolic logic in their reasoning;
2. conduct deductive & Inductive reasoning in problem solving approach; 3.
solve complex numbers; and 4. identify sets & subjects.
Education 182 New
Course Contents
Mathematics and Symbolic Logic. Matrices and Determinants. Vectors and Complex Numbers.
Introduction to Straight Lines. Introduction to Circle. Simple Sequence and Series. Limits.
Differentiation and Integration. Maximum and Minimum Points and Value. Linear
Programming (Inequalities and Constraints)
BED 124: Principles of Marketing for Business Educators (2 Units; C) (LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. demonstrate knowledge of marketing
2. state why business and marketing are changing
3. state functions and principles of marketing
4. dse the marketing mix to satisfy consumer needs
5. segment the market using different factors
6. carry out retailing and wholesaling activities
7. determine factors that influence consumer behavior.
8. identify consumer rights and state how o protect the consumer
Course Content
Meaning of Market. Changes in business and market places. Marketing concept. Principles of
Marketing. Functions of Marketing. The marketing process. Marketing Mix. Market
segmentation. Retailing. Wholesaling. Consumer buying behaviour. Consumer protection.
Impact of globalization on marketing. BED 211: Financial Accounting for Business Educators II (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this course, students should be able to prepare:
1. a manufacturing accounts of a production outfit from a set of information;
2. a bill of exchange account from a set of financial transactions of a business;
3. an account of a non-for-profit organization from historical data;
4. department accounts from a given set of financial transactions; 5. consignment
accounts of a business entity; and 6. royalty accounts of a business concern.
Course Contents
Analysis of trade receivables. Analysis of trade payables. Preparation and presentation of
manufacturing accounts. Bill of exchange. Partnership account. Incomplete records. Single
entry system of account. Double entry system of account. Accounts of not-for-profit
organization. Control account. Departmental accounts. Consignment account. Royalty
accounts.

BED 213: Principles of Business Finance (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. identify the types of funds available to an enterprise;
2. identify the various sources of finance available to an organization;
3. apply working capital management strategies,
4. apply capital budgeting techniques in mapping project decisions; and 5.
demonstrate acquired knowledge of risk and portfolio management.
Course Contents
Nature of finance. Types of funds. Source of capital formation. Working capital management.
Credit management. Financial markets and stock exchange. Stock exchange dealing
procedures. Financial analysis. Capital budgeting. Management of risks and portfolio. Problem
based learning techniques.

BED 214: Business Communication & Report Writing (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. explain the concept of business communication skills;
Education 185 New
2. discuss the process that takes place in communication;
3. state the different types of communication;
4. explain the steps in writing process;
5. state the principles of interpersonal relationship;
6. describe interview skills for recruitment purpose; and
7. identify the necessary plans to make before negotiating communication.
Course Contents
Fundamentals of communication. Forms of communication. Introduction to business
communication skills. Forms of business communication. Study skills. English grammar.
Punctuation in english. Sentence formation. Oral communication. Writing process. Public
speaking. Interpersonal communication. Negotiation skills. Corporate communication.
Interview skills. Communication technology
BED 222: Cost Accounting for Business Educators (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. state the attitudes of cost accounting information
2. classify cost accounting information using various bases;
3. prepare a job costs sheet for management decision making
4. prepare labour costs of an operation of a business concern;
5. identify and apportion costs of production to various costs centres;
6. ascertain costs of production using marginal and absorption techniques; and
7. prepare cost information
Course Contents
Definition of cost accounting. The purpose and scope of cost accounting. Role of cost
accountants. Differentiate between cost accounting and financial accounting. The managerial
processes of planning, control and decision making. The concepts of strategic, tactical and
operational planning. Differentiate between data and information. Cost and Cost
classifications. Cost codification. Cost segregation and estimation. Accounting for inventory.
Accounting for Labour. Accounting for overheads. Marginal costing. Absorption costing. Cost
Volume-Profit-Analysis. Budgeting
BED 223: Office Information Technology (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. demonstrate knowledge of information and communication handling procedure in the
organization;
2. describe skill for handling office information and communication procedure;
3. elucidate understanding and practical knowledge of information security in the
organization; and
4. explain the basic concept of office automation.

Education 186 New
Course Contents
Present day office arrangement. Office environment. Types and uses of office machines
(manual and electronic gadgets). Information technology and information processing task.
Management information system. Office automation. Computer security. Information system
disaster recovery plan. Software types and their capabilities. Information Technology and
ebusiness enabling environment. Management of people in organization. Information
technology strategies. The future for information technologyBED 312: Financial Reporting for Business Educators (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. explain the sources of accounting regulation in Nigeria;
2. outline the roadmap for conversion to IFRS in Nigeria;
3. describe the rules on financial statement set out in Companies and Allied Matters Act
Cap C 20 LFN 2020 (Amended);
4. explain the objectives of financial statement;
5. explain the measurement bases available under IFRS;
6. state the components of a set of financial statements according to IAS 1;
7. distinguish between accounting policy and accounting estimates;
8. account for contract costs;
9. measure inventory;
10. measure Property, plant and equipment;
11. account for investment property; and 12. account for impairment under IAS 36.
Course Contents
Education 189 New
Regulatory Framework. Accounting and reporting frameworks and practices. Presentation of
financial statements. Accounting policies, changes in accounting estimates and errors.
Inventory. Revenue from contracts. Property, plant and equipment. Assets. Impairment of
Assets. Leases. Provisions, contingent liabilities and contingent asset. Fair value. Financial
instruments. Consolidated accounts. Joint venture. Statement of cashflow. Earnings per share.
Analysis and interpretation of financial statement.
BED 313: Nigerian Marketing System (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. appreciate the Nigerian marketing environment;
2. segment the market according to consumer needs;
3. forecast the market;
4. develop new product and classify them;
5. develop market strategies for the product;
6. manage channels of distribution; and
7. utilize promotion variables for marketing products and services.
Course Contents
Marketing definitions, concepts, evolution, role and importance of the marketing system.
Marketing analysis; The marketing environment. Buyer behavior, market segmentation,
market measurement and forecasting. Marketing research. Basic marketing and commercial
policies in business. The product concept; product development and life cycle, product
classification and market strategies. Pricing, Management of channels of distribution.
Promotion: advertising, personal selling, publicity, public relations and sales promotion,
marketing of professional services including services of business educators.
BED 315: Theories of Entrepreneurship (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. identify the different schools of entrepreneurial thoughts;
2. explain the different school of thoughts;
3. differentiate between the macro view and the micro view;
4. explain the effect of entrepreneurship theories on entrepreneurial education; and
5. state the relevance of entrepreneurship theories to contemporary entrepreneurship
education.
Course Contents
Schools of entrepreneurial thoughts. Macro view- the environmental school of thought. the
financial capital school of thought, the micro view- the entrepreneurial trait school of thought.
The venture opportunity school of taught, the strategic formulation school of thought. The
Weber Thesis entrepreneurship, Schumpeterian theory and the achievement Motivation
theory of entrepreneurship Effect of entrepreneurial theories on teaching and learning.
Relevance of entrepreneuship theories on contemporary entrepreneurship control; concept of
alertness in entrepreneurship environment. Linking theories to students business dreams
Education 190 New
BED 320: Marketing Management for Business Educators (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. apply fundamental principles and functions of management to marketing;
2. apply marketing strategies to meet consumer needs;
3. demonstrate knowledge of consumer rights and demonstrate commitment to
consumerism; and
4. demonstrate social responsibility in marketing.
Course Contents
Application of the fundamental principles of management to the marketing functions; analysis,
planning, organizing, control and evaluation of marketing function; marketing strategy;
product, price, promotion and distribution strategies; consumerism and social responsibility
of marketing information system.
BED 321: Management Accounting for Business Educators (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. compare job order with process costing;
2. design and use activity based costing system;
3. prepare managerial accounting statements;
4. compute necessary managerial accounting information; 5. prepare simple budgets; and
6. analyze variance.
Course Contents
General Principles of costing. Cost accounting systems. Determination of cost behaviour.
Element of cost and cost estimation techniques. Activity based costing. Specific order costing.
Contract costing. Process costing. Forecasting. Variance analysis. Relevant cost. Decision
making techniques. Budget and Budgetary Control. Standard Costing. Sources of Finance.
Payback Period. Accounting Rate of Return. Net Present Value. Internal Rate of Return.
Profitability Index. Performance Measurement
BED 322: Public Sector Accounting for Business Educators (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. explain at an appropriate level of confidence the nature and objectives of public sector
accounting;
2. identify the various users of public sector accounting and their information needs;
3. identify and apply the various bases of public sector accounting;
4. identify the various sources of government revenue and revenue officers of government;
5. prepare and present monthly transcript from a set of information; and
6. prepare and present the final accounts of government in line with applicable standards
Course Contents
Nature and objective of public sector accounting. Users of public sector accounting.
Information and bases of public sector accounting. Sources of government revenue. Finance
Education 191 New
officers of government. Government expenditure. Preparation of vouchers. Functions of the
cash office. Preparation of monthly transcripts. Budgets and government final accounts in line
with applicable International Public Sector Accounting Standard (IPSAS).

BED 323: Management Information System (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. differentiate between data and information;
2. identify the components of a system;
3. identify characteristics of a good management information system; 4. state the
functions of Management Information System; and
5. apply different information systems in business.
Course Contents
Nature of management information system, data and information, concept of a system,
component of a system, open system, semi-closed system and closed system, control system,
function of management information system, characteristics of a good management
information system. Information systems in business: transaction processing system, decision
support system, executive support system, export system.
BED 324: Sales Management for Business Educators (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. demonstrate knowledge of sales management;
2. state responsibilities of sales managers;
3. identify factors that affect performance of sales persons;
4. state how to boost sales person’s performance;
5. describe the selling process; 6. plan and budget sales; and
7. organize the sales force.
Course Contents
Relevance of sales management to Business Educators. Sales managers’ responsibilities. Sales
persons, types and characteristics. Factors that affect performance of sales persons.
Management actions to boost sales person performance. Selling functions and basic tasks.
Personal selling functions. The selling process. Sales planning and budgeting. Managing sales
operations. Market potential and sales forecasting. Organizing the sales force. The buying
process. Sales organization structure. Sales promotion.
BED 325: Creativity and Innovation in Business (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. demonstrate knowledge of innovation;
2. apply creativity in the process of innovation;
3. generate business ideas;
4. demonstrate ability to carry out feasibility study and write a business plan; and
Education 192 New
5. demonstrate ability for new product creation, implementation, management and
sustenance
Course Contents
Introduction to product innovation. Definition of innovation of a product. Definition of
innovation roadmap. Types of product innovation. Elements of innovating a process.
Objectives of innovating a product Creativity in the process of innovation. The role of existing
community SME in innovation, The concept of idea generation, Concept phase, advancement,
construction, launch and perfection of product. The need for collaboration, ideation,
implementation, value creation, packaging of products and repackaging for value addition.
BED 326: Nigeria Business Environment (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. explain a business environment;
2. describe the trends in enterprise promotion;
3. identify the fundamentals of community-institution partnership;
4. identify emerging business platforms; and
5. discuss the various Government interventions in business environments.
Course Contents
Overview of a business environment. Emerging trends in small business enterprise
promotion. Community-institution partnership. Technological business
platforms/environments. Government policy control measures and interventions. Emerging
digital markets. The 21st century labour market
BED 327: Digital Skills in Business Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. demonstrate knowledge of digital skills;
2. identify types of digital skills needed in modern office;
3. utilize digital skills to handle information and solve problems;
4. manage digital information and content;
5. utilize digital techniques to market products in the social media.
Course Contents
Definition of digital skills. Basic digital skills. Types of digital skills. Handling information and
content. Problem solving. Functional use of digital devices. Funding, managing and storing
digital information and content. Email marketing. Mobile design principles. Mobile
optimization. Improving customers experience with digital technologies. Social media
marketing.
BED 328: Word Processing for Business Educators II (2 Units C: LH 15, PH
45)
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this course, students should be able to:
Education 193 New
1. type simple letters using Microsoft word in block or indented styles;
2. activate vertical and horizontal display of documents;
3. type letters with continuation sheets, attention lines;
4. prepare circular letters, agenda, manuscripts;
5. type document with column and
6. prepare itineraries, and travel information cards.
Course Contents
Simple block or centered display. Vertical or horizontal centering. Simple columnar materials
or words or figures or money. Letters with continuation sheets, attention lines, heading,
simple insert tabulation. Circular letters, agenda, manuscripts with interpolations and
corrections. Alphabetical and numerical arrangement, terminal speed of 35 wpm with 90%
accuracy is required. Communication forms, letters, manuscripts, tabulations, reports, tabular
statement with statistical information, divided columns, itineraries and travel information
cards. Attention is given to improved form and punctuation, terminal speed of 54 words a
minute with 90% accuracy required.
BED 329: SIWES (4 Units C: PH 180)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. appreciate the opportunity to have practical work experience;
2. demonstrate readiness to acquire practical skills available to work station;
3. demonstrate ability to learn work habits; and
4. cooperate with industry, based trainers and supervisors.
Course Contents
Students will be sent to the industry to have industrial experience at workplace. They are to
be exposed to work situations that will enable them to acquire skills to complement what they
learned in the classroom. They are to be supervised by both industrial and school based
supervisors. 
