BIO 101: General Biology I (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of lectures in Plant Biology, students should be able to:
1. explain cells structure and organizations;
2. summarize functions of cellular organelles;
3. characterize living organisms and state their general reproduction;
4. describe the interrelationship that exists between organisms; 5. discuss the concept
of heredity and evolution; and
6. enumerate habitat types and their characteristics.
Course Contents
Cell structure and organization, functions of cellular organelles, characteristics and
classification of living things, chromosomes, genes their relationships and importance, general
reproduction, interrelationships of organisms (competitions, parasitism, predation, symbiosis,
commensalisms, mutualism, saprophytism); heredity and evolution (introduction to Darwinism
and Lamarkism, Mendelian laws, explanation of key genetic terms), elements of ecology and
types of habitat.

BIO 102: General Biology II (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures in Introductory Ecology, students should be able to:
1. state the unique characteristics of plant and animal kingdoms;
2. describe ecological adaptations in the plant and animal kingdoms;
3. give a summary of the physiology of plants and animals;
4. explain nutrition, respiration, excretion and reproduction in plants and animals; and
5. describe growth and development in plants and animals.
Education 152 New
Course Contents
A generalized survey of the plant and animal kingdoms based mainly on study of similarities
and differences in the external features, ecological adaptations of these forms. Briefs on
physiology to include nutrition, respiration, circulatory systems, excretion, reproduction,
growth and development.

BIO 107: General Biology Practical I (1 Unit C: PH 45)
Learning outcome
At the end of the lectures in Introductory Ecology, students should be able to:
1. outline common laboratory hazards;
2. provide precautions on laboratory hazards;
3. state the functions of the different parts of microscope;
4. use the microscope and describe its maintenance;
5. draw biological diagrams and illustrations; and
6. apply scaling and proportion to biological diagrams.
Course Contents
Common laboratory hazards: prevention and first aid; measurements in biology; uses and
care of microscope: compound and dissecting microscope. Biological drawings and
illustration, scaling, accuracy and proportion; use of common laboratory apparatus and
laboratory experiments designed to illustrate the topics covered in BIO 101

BIO 108: General Biology Practical II (1 Unit C: PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures in Animal Biology, students should be able to:
1. describe the anatomy of flowering plants;
2. differentiate types of fruit and seeds;
3. state ways of handling and caring for biological wares;
4. describe the basic histology of animal tissues; and
5. identify various groups in the animal kingdom.
Course Contents
Anatomy of flowering plants, primary vegetative body: stem, leaf and root to show the mature
tissues namely parenchyma, collenchyma, sclerenchyma, xylem and phloem. Types of fruits
and seeds. Care and use of dissecting kits and other biological wares. Dissection and general
histology of animal tissues based on vertebrate forms. Morphology and functions of epithelial,
muscular, nervous and connective tissues. Examination of various groups of lower
invertebrates under microscopes, identification of various groups of organisms in Animal
Kingdom. And any experiment designed to emphasize the practical aspects of topics in BIO
102. 

SED 202: General Biology Methods I (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, the students should be able to:
1. analyse and critique the biology core curriculum;
2. develop specific lesson notes from the biology core curriculum;
3. select appropriate objectives and learning experiences for different topics of the biology
core curriculum;
4. assess different concepts through paper and pencil tests, observation and portfolios;
5. identify difficult concepts in biology with justification;
6. use appropriate methods in the teaching of difficult concepts in biology;
7. set up and manage zoom and google classroom platforms; and
8. identify misconceptions, alternative conceptions and indigenous biology knowledge and
relate them to concepts in the biology core curriculum.
Course Contents
The biology core curriculum, developing lesson notes from the core curriculum, selection of
appropriate general and specific objectives and learning experiences for individual topics.
Assessment in biology, paper and pencil tests, assessment of practical/laboratory skills,
observation and portfolios. Difficult concepts in biology, the use of role play, vignettes,
problem-based approach and case studies to teach difficult concepts in biology. Use of
elearning platforms, zoom, google scholar. Indigenous biology knowledge and the biology core
curriculum, culturo-techno-contextual approach (CTCA). Misconceptions in biology, alternative
conceptions and sources of alternative conceptions.

BIO 201: Genetics I (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. distinguish between heritable and non-heritable characteristics;
2. explain the likelihood of genetic events (Probability) and how well those events (results)
fit into a set of observation;
3. discuss polygenic variations; and
4. describe concepts in population genetics.
Course Contents
Hereditable and non-hereditable characteristics. Probability and tests of goodness of fit.
Quantitative inheritance; variation in genome structure, introduction to population genetics.

BIO 202: Introductory Ecology (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures in this course, students should be able to:
1. explain various concepts and terminologies associated with the ecosystem;
2. list and explain features of various habitat types;
Education 159 New
3. explain natural destruction/disaster, community and natural cycles; and
4. explain and describe factors responsible for changes in population.
Course Contents
Concept and definition of ecosystem, ecology at community level, ecological classification of
habitat types, terrestrial and aquatic biomass, specific features of each, biotic components of
habitat. Natural destruction, factors of communities, success of community interaction, natural
cycle, dynamics of population.

BIO 203: General Physiology (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. describe the chemistry of organic compounds and their biological importance;
2. state the general characteristics of enzymes;
3. describe nutrition, digestion and absorption in plants and animals;
4. discuss the cell membrane structure and list its functions;
5. summarize osmoregulation, excretion and transport in animals;
6. enumerate growth hormones in plants and their functions;
7. explain the homeostasis, their coordination and functions in animals; and 8.
explain the plant water relation, growth and growth regulation.
Course Contents
Chemicals of life: The chemistry of Carbohydrates, lipids, proteins and nucleic acids and their
biological importance. General characteristics of enzymes; nutrition, digestion, and absorption
in plants and animals. Biosynthesis: Photosynthesis and protein synthesis. Cell membrane
structure and function. A general study of osmoregulation, excretion, transport, growth
hormones and enzymology, homeostasis and their co-ordination in animals. Plant water
relation, growth and growth regulation. Pre-requisite -BIO 101 and 103

BIO 204: Biological Techniques (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this lectures, students should be able to:
1. list the different parts of a light microscope and state their functions;
2. state and explain the stages involved in preparation of slides;
3. describe the basic principles of spectrophotometry, colorimetry, photometry, polarimetry,
chromatography, refractometry, melting points and colligative properties;
4. describe the basic collection and preservation processes of plant and animal materials and
their preservation in Herbarium and Museum respectively; and
5. explain the need for experimental design, basis of report writing and presentations.
Course Contents
Microscopy: handling of microscopes, preparation of microscope slides (microtomy) for
microscopic examinations, use of hand lens, biological drawings and diagrams.
Spectrophotometry, colorimetry, photometry, polarimetry, chromatography, refractometry,
melting points and colligative properties Herbarium and Museum Techniques. Experimental
designs, report writing and presentations.
Education 160 New

BIO 205: Introductory Developmental / Cell Biology (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures in this course, students should be able to:
1. draw the detail structure of plant and animal cells and state the functions of the
organelles;
2. summarize and state the differences and similarities between mitosis and meiosis;
3. describe cell differentiation and its growth; and
4. explain the molecular basis of cell structure and development.
Course Contents
History and present trends in cell biology. Ultra-structure of the plant and animal cells,
Organelles and their basic structures and functions; mitosis and meiosis, cell differentiation
and growth of cells. A brief study of the molecular basis of cell structure and development.

BIO 206: Hydrobiology (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures in Hydrobiology, students should be able to:
1. discuss the physical properties of water;
2. explain the thermal stratification of lakes;
3. summarize the importance and interplay of oxygen, carbon-dioxide and pH in water,
4. describe fresh water communities;
5. list factors influencing the distribution and productivity of aquatic macrophytes,
phytoplanktons, benthic algae and zooplanktons;
6. discuss the importance and adaptive features of Estuarine communities; and
7. explain colonisation and succession in aquatic ecosystem.
Course Contents
Principles of aquatic biology with particular reference to limnology. The physical properties of
water and their biological significance. Thermal stratification of lakes; waves and currents and
their effects on substratum; dissolved oxygen, carbon-dioxide and inorganic ions in freshwater;
the carbonate-bicarbonate system and pH; Oligotrophic and Eutrophic lakes; the chemical
composition of African lake waters; freshwater communities, factors influencing the
distribution and productivity of aquatic macrophytes, phytoplanktons, benthic algae;
Zooplanktons in freshwater; marine brackish water/estuarine communities and their chemical
factors; colonisation and succession in aquatic ecosystems, adaptations and interrelationships.

BCH 201: General Biochemistry I (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1 identify the chemical and molecular chemical and molecular components of the cell as the
unit of life;
2 state and decipher the different nomenclature of the chemical and molecular components
of the cell
3 discuss the interrelationship of the components of the cell with each other; and 4 isolate
the components of the cell.
Education 161 New
Course Contents
Introductory chemistry of amino acids; their properties, reactions and biological functions.
Classification of amino acids: neutral, basic and acidic; polar and non-polar; essential and
nonessential amino acids. Peptides. Introductory chemistry and classification of proteins.
Biological functions of proteins. Methods of their isolation, purification and identification.
Primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary structures of proteins. Basic principles of tests for
proteins and amino acids. Introductory chemistry of carbohydrates, lipids and nucleic acids.
Nomenclature of nucleosides, and nucleotides; effects of acid and alkali on hydrolysis of nucleic
acids.

MCB 221: General Microbiology (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain basic concepts and scope of microbiology;
2. classify organisms into prokaryotes and eukaryotes;
3. culture and isolate micro-organisms;
4. identify selected microbial groups and their economic importance;
5. discuss the layout of a microbiology laboratory;
6. enumerate the different equipment and reagents in a microbiology laboratory; and
7. explain the theory behind basic protocols in a microbiology laboratory.
Course Contents
History of the Science of Microbiology. Classification of organisms into prokaryotes and
eukaryotes; Classification of prokaryotes into archaea and eubacteria Anatomy and
cytochemistry of bacteria and fungi. Shapes, groupings and colonial morphology of bacteria
and fungi. Structure of viruses. Sterilization and disinfection; Structure, ecology and
reproduction of representative microbial genera. Culture of micro-organisms. Isolation of
micro-organisms; isolation of bacteria, viruses fungi (yeasts and moulds. Nutrition and
biochemical activities of micro-organisms. Antigens and antibodies. Identification and
economic importance of selected microbial groups. Microbial variation and heredity. Study of
laboratory Equipment. Introduction to microbiology of air food, milk, dairy products, water and
soil. Staining techniques, antibiotic sensitivity tests, serological tests, antimicrobial agents. 

BIO 301: Genetics II (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures in this course, students should be able to:
1. summarize various aspects of human genetics and pedigree analysis;
2. discuss various aspects of gene interactions, biochemical mutants;
3. describe the types and functions of nucleic acids and nucleotides;
4. explain DNA replication and mutation;
5. discuss proteins and regulation of gene expression; and
6. describe the importance and processes involved in DNA technology and how it influences
genetic engineering.
Course Contents
Aspects of human genetics; pedigree analysis. Further consideration of various deviations from
basic principles. Gene interactions, including biochemical mutants, nucleic acids and
nucleotides, DNA replication, mutation of DNA, proteins and regulation of gene expression.
DNA technology and genetic engineering.
Pre- requisite -BIO 201.

BIO 302: Population Biology and Evolution (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures in Population genetic, students should be able to:
1. explain the concept of natural selection;
2. summarize evolution of some organisms;
3. discuss how organisms adapt to their environment;
4. apply mathematical formulae and models to genetic variations and predictions in
population; and
5. describe factors responsible for population changes.
Course Contents
Biological properties of species; Natural selection, variations, isolation mechanisms (including
their breakdown resulting in hybridization, adaptation, origin of life, origin of species and
adaptive radiation, Evolution of selected groups of plants and animals, including humans).
Population dynamics, factors affecting population growth.

BIO 303: Biogeography and Soil Biology (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. explain the theories related to Gondwanaland, continental drift and land bridges;
Education 165 New
2. outline the world key flora and fauna groups and reasons for their distribution;
3. explain succession, colonisation and dispersal of plants and animals;
4. describe the concept of endemicity, refugia and Island biogeography;
5. discuss physical and chemical nature of soil;
6. summarise the cycling of minerals and nutrients;
7. explain soil and animal soil water relationship; and
8. outline the causes of soil erosion and alleviation methods.
Course Contents
Gondwanaland and theory of continental drift; theory of land bridges; distribution of world key
floral and faunal groups including factors affecting distribution; phyto- and zoogeographyical
regions of the world. Relationships between plants and animal distributions (emphasising local
examples). Concept of successesion, colonisation and dispersal in terrestrial plants and
animals. Concept of endemicity and refugia. Island biogeography. Physical and chemical nature
of soil. Detritus organisms. Cycling of minerals and nutrient pools. Plant and animal soil water
relationship, soil sampling techniques. Causes of soil erosion and alleviation
methods/techniques.

BIO 304: Nigerian Fauna and Flora (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures in Nigerian Fauna and Flora, students should be able to:
1. identify Nigerian plants and animals, and associate them with habitats;
2. confirm identified plants and animals with Herbarium and Museum specimens respectively;
3. describe the life histories strategies of selected plants and animals; and
4. discuss the prospects, problems and problem alleviation strategies of protected areas in
Nigeria.
Course Contents
Field identification of Nigerian plants and animals; plant and animal indicators of Nigerian
biomes (i.e. association of habitats with specific plants and animals);identification of plants
through preserved herbarium specimens and keys, identification of animals through signs left
by them such as footprints, trails, scats, runways and museum specimens; life history
strategies of selected Nigerian plants and animals; Nigerian protected area system, their
prospects, problems and problem alleviation strategies.

BIO 306: Systematic Biology (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. describe the Pre-Linnaean, Linnaean and Darwinian taxonomic concepts of species;
2. explain the binomial system of nomenclature;
3. classify organisms based on the binomial system of nomenclature; and
4. explain the concept of keys and keying and their applications.
Course Contents
Historical background, pre-Linnaean, Linnaean and Darwinian, taxonomic hierarchies; species
concept, categories below species and categories above species; biological nomenclature, new
systematics; numerical and binomial taxonomy, keys and keying.
Education 166 New

BIO 307: Field Course I (1 Unit C: PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this field trip, students should be able to:
1. conduct basic field sampling techniques in terrestrial, aquatic and aerial environment;
2. collect plant and animal materials for identification, classification and preservation in the
herbarium and museum respectively; and
3. explain the importance of the institutes and industries visited to Biology.
Course Contents
Sampling techniques in local habitats (i.e., not more than 20 km radius of the University). Also
involve visits to research institutes, industries and other related institute. This should cover
several areas of specialisation in Biology. Assessment by examination (objectives, short answer
questions, fill in the gaps) in addition to group report. 

BIO 402: Principles of Plants and Animal Breeding (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures in Population genetic, students should be able to:
1. explain principles of plant and animal breeding;
2. enumerate the importance of heterosis, sterility and inbreeding consequences;
3. state management strategies for pests and diseases;
4. possess ability to conduct breeding exercises in plants and animals;
5. develop appropriate management practices required for plant and animal breeding; and
6. keep adequate farm records.
Course Contents
Importance of plant and animal breeding with examples. Cytogenetic principles of breeding,
heterosis, inbreeding consequences, incompatibility mechanisms, sterility, breeding methods,
disease and pest resistance and their management, major domestic plants and animals’
breeding practices, and desired traits used to sustain their qualities. General management and
farm record keeping.

BIO 403: Wildlife Conservation and Management (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures in population genetic, students should be able to:
1. state the principles/glossaries of wildlife management;
2. outline wildlife diseases;
3. identify problems and prospects in wildlife resources;
4. outline conservation policies related to wildlife; and
5. explain the impact of climate change on wildlife resources.
Course Contents
General principles/glossaries of ecosystem management. Biological gardens. Wildlife diseases.
principles of wildlife management. Wildlife in Nigeria: conservation policies. problems and
prospects. World wildlife resources and their protection. Conflicts related to wildlife resources.
climate change and wildlife resources. International and national laws related to wildlife
resources. Fire as tool in terrestrial wildlife management.
Education 168 New

BIO 404: Nigerian Plants and Animals in Prophylactics and Therapeutics (2
Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures in this course, students should be able to:
1. explain the historical development of plants and animals in prophylatics and therapeutics
(Phamacognosy);
2. define some terminologies used in pharmacognosy;
3. appreciate the classification and uses of plants and animals in prophylatics and
therapeutics in Nigeria;
4. understand crude traditional methods of preparation and uses;
5. identify and describe modern methods of preparation and uses of plants and animals as
prophylatics and therapeautics; and
6. account for the evaluation and adulteration of crude drugs, and the need for quality
control
Course Contents
Historical development and scope of plants and animals in prophylatics and therapeutics
(Phamacognosy). Some terminologies used in pharmacognosy. Classification and uses of
plants and animals in prophylatics and therapeutics in Nigeria. Crude traditional methods of
preparation and uses. Modern methods of preparation and uses of plants and animals as
prophylatics and therapeautics. Evaluation and adulteration of crude drugs (extraction
methods, identification of phytochemicals, proximate analysis, minerals, organoleptic,
microscopic, physical, chemical and biological). Deterioration and adulteration of crude drugs.
Quality control.

BIO 407: Field Course II (1 Unit C: PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the field course, the students should be able to:
1. acquire knowledge on various field aspects of biology;
2. demonstrate ability to plan and conduct a series of simple field experiments and
collection of data;
3. develop the ability, to record, summarize, classify, preserve specimens collected from
the field;
4. develop thin working and individual skills, learn to manage time effectively; and 5.
write biological and field reports with appropriate presentation.
Course Contents
Field trips should be conducted to meet the requirements of various aspects of Biology taught
in the classroom. The field course should add to, and fulfil other practical aspects of ecology,
hydrobiology, wildlife and forestry, taxonomy and systematics and others. Guided field visits
by students to observe plants and animals, learn sampling techniques as related to plants and
animals, collect samples, classify, preserve in herbarium and museum accordingly. Conduct
field researches, collect data and analyse. Visit to industries, wildlife parks, zoological gardens,
afforestation fields/woodlot parks, reservoirs /dams, farms, environmental control
establishments and sites, and other areas of biological importance. Field projects (individual
or grouped), report writing and examination.
Education 169 New

BIO 408: Applied Biotechnology (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures in this course, students should be able to:
1. conduct DNA extraction from different tissues;
2. quantify DNA and proteins;
3. outline the types of chromatography;
4. describe DNA amplification;
5. apply the knowledge of biotechnology to protein engineering, medicine, food and
forensic science; and
6. incorporate the knowledge of biotechnology in the treatment of wastes.
Course Contents
Extraction of DNA and proteins from various tissues, quantification of DNA and proteins.
Molecular biology techniques including chromatography (paper and thin layer).
Electrophoresis. amplification of DNA using polymerase chain reaction. Identification and
genomic sequencing. Introduction of DNA IUTA and cloning in cell. Application of
biotechnology in protein engineering and production, medicine and forensic science,
bioindustrial production of genetically engineered medicinal and food products using living
factories. Environmental protection and cleansing through biotechnological treatment of solid,
liquid, chemical and nuclear waste.

BIO 410: Bio-Entrepreneurial Options (2 Unit C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures in this course, students should be able to:
1. acquire an understanding of the background, appropriate theory and methods relating
to any of the chosen topics;
2. appraise and discuss how knowledge acquired can be used to become an independent
entrepreneur;
3. discuss project cycle, financial sourcing and management; and
4. design and plan how any of the products can be produced on a large scale for national
and international markets.
Course Contents
Students are required to take 2 Units of direct studies in any one of the areas listed below.
Availability of each area depends on staff on the ground. Examples of these options include
but not limited to 1. Mushroom farming.
2. Tissue culture.
3. Apiculture.
4. Weed management and control.
5. Introduction to ornithology/poultry production.
6. Environmental impact assessment.
7. Horticulture/Applied horticulture and landscape ecology.
8. Orchards / Production of vegetables.
9. Herpetology.
10. Introduction to Vaccine and anti-venom production.
11. Heliciculture.
Education 170 New
12. Techniques in disease diagnosis.
13. Production of slides and Photomicrography.
14. Production and management of ruminants/monogastric animals.

BIO 413: Bioinformatics (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures, the students should be able to:
1. explain the history of bioinformatics;
2. identify basic instruments required in bioinformatics; 3. Outline
DNA and protein databases; and
4. describe genomics and proteomics.
Course Contents
Introduction to computer based analyses and management applications of molecular biological
data. history of bioinformatics. Instrumentation: PC applications, resources, introduction to
DNA and protein databases. data storage. file formats and information retrieval. genomics and
proteomics.

BIO 414: Molecular Biology (2 Units C: LH 30; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the lectures in this course, students shall be able to:
1. describe the structure and roles of DNA and RNA;
2. discuss Gene regulation, DNA replication, genetic transformation and recombinant DNA
technology;
3. summarize the roles of Nucleic acids and proteins in the cell division, growth and
development; and
4. list the importance and application of Molecular Biology in food production, medicine and
genetic engineering.
Course Contents
Structure and role of DNA. Structure and role of RNA.
Describe gene regulation, DNA replication, genetic transformation and recombinant DNA
technology. Describe biological systems at the molecular level. Nucleic acids and proteins and
how they interactively regulate cell division, growth and development. Evolution of genomes.
Practical applications of the knowledge of molecular Biology (in alleviation of food shortages,
plant breeding, disease resistant crops, animal breeding, marriage, medicine, genetic
engineering and others).
