Global Course Structure
100-Level
Course
Code
Course Title Unit(s) Status LH PH
GST 111 Communication in English 2 C 15 45
GST 112 Nigerian Peoples and Culture 2 C 30 -
EDU 101 Introduction to Teaching Profession 2 C 30 -
COS 101 Introduction to Computing Sciences 3 C 30 45
COS 102 Problem Solving 3 C 30 45
Education 271 New
MTH 101 General Mathematics 2 C 30 -
PHY 102 General Physics 2 C 30 -
PHY 107 General Physics Laboratory 1 C - 45
Total Unit 17

200 Levels
Course
Code
Course Title Units Status LH PH
GST 211 Environment & Sustainable
Development 2 C 30 -
ENT 211 Entrepreneurship and Innovation 2 C 30
-
EDU 201 Curriculum, Curriculum Delivery and
Teaching Methods
2 C 30 -
COS 201 Computer Programming I 3 C 30 45
COS 202 Computer Programming II 3 C 30 45
CSC 203 Discrete Structures 2 C 30 -
IFT 211 Digital Logic Design 2 C 15 45
IFT 212 Computer Architecture and
Organization 2 C 15 45
MTH 201 Mathematical Methods I 2 C 30 -
MTH 202 Mathematical Methods II 2 C 30 -
SEN 201 Introduction to Software
Engineering 2 C 30 -
CSC 299 SIWES I 3 C - 135
 Total
Unit
27
SIWES I now hold during the long vacation of 200L
300-Level
Course
Code
Course Title Units Status LH PH
ENT
312
Venture Creation 2 C 15 45
GST
312
Peace and Conflict Resolution 2 C 30 -
EDU
301
Teaching Practice I 3 C - 135
EDU
302
Educational Measurements, Tests,
Research Methods and Statistics
2 C 30 -
:
Education 272 New
CSC 301 Data Structures 3 C 30 45
CSC 308 Operating Systems 3 C 30 45
CSC 309 Artificial Intelligence 2 C 30 -
CSC 322 Computer Science Innovation and
New Technologies 2 C 15 45
CYB 201 Introduction to Cyber Security and
Strategy 2 C 30 -
DTS 304 Data Management 3 C 30 45
ICT 305 Data Communication System &
Network 3 C 30 45
CSC 399 SIWES II 3 C - 135
Total 30
SIWES now holds during the long vacation of 300L

Education 273 New
400-Level
Course
Code
Course Title Units Status LH PH
EDU 400 Project
3
 C - 135
EDU
401
Teaching Practice II 3 C - 135
CSC
401
Algorithms and Complexity Analysis 2 C 30 -
INS
401
Project Management 2 C 30 -
CSC
402
Ethics and Legal Issues in Computer
Science
2 C 30 -

Total Unit
12Course Contents and Learning Outcomes
GST 111: Communication I English (2 Units C: LH15; PH45)
Leaning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. identify possible sound patterns in English Language;
2. list notable Language skills;
3. classify word formation processes;
4. construct simple and fairly complex sentences in English;
5. apply logical and critical reasoning skills for meaningful presentations;
6. demonstrate an appreciable level of the art of public speaking and listening;
7. write simple and technical reports;
8. learn the major word formation process; 9. apply ICT in to modern language
learning, and
10. practice report writing.
Course Contents
Sound patterns in English Language (vowels and consonants, phonetics and
phonology). English word classes (lexical and grammatical words, definitions,
forms, functions, usages, collocations). Sentence in English (types: structural
and functional, simple and complex). Grammar and Usage (tense, mood,
modality and concord, aspects of language use in everyday life). Logical and
Critical Thinking and Reasoning Methods (Logic and Syllogism, Inductive and
Deductive Argument and Reasoning Methods, Analogy, Generalisation and
Explanations). Ethical considerations, Copyright Rules and Infringements.
Writing Activities: (Pre-writing, Writing, Post writing, Editing and Proofreading;
Brainstorming, outlining, Paragraphing, Types of writing, Summary, Essays,
Letter, Curriculum Vitae, Report writing and Note making. Mechanics of
writing). Comprehension Strategies: (Reading and types of Reading,
Comprehension Skills, 3RsQ). Information and Communication Technology in
:
Education 274 New
modern Language Learning. Language skills for effective communication. Major
word formation processes. Writing and reading comprehension strategies.
Logical and critical reasoning for meaningful presentations. Art of public
speaking and listening. Report writing.
GST112: Nigerian Peoples and Culture (2 Units C: LH 30)
Leaning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. analyse the historical foundation of the Nigerian culture and arts in pre-colonial
times;
2. list and identify the major linguistic groups in Nigeria;
3. explain the gradual evolution of Nigeria as a political unit;
4. analyse the concepts of Trade, Economic and Self-reliance status of the Nigerian
peoples towards national development;
5. enumerate the challenges of the Nigerian State towards Nation building
6. analyse the role of the Judiciary in upholding people’s fundamental rights
7. identify acceptable norms and values of the major ethnic groups in Nigeria;
8. list and suggest possible solutions to identifiable Nigerian environmental, moral
and value problems;
9. demonstrate knowledge of the concepts of trade and economics of self-reliance,
and
10. identify with the current socio-political and cultural developments in Nigeria.
Course Contents
Nigerian history, culture and art up to 1800 (Yoruba, Hausa and Igbo peoples
and culture; peoples and culture of the ethnic minority groups). Nigeria under
colonial rule (advent of colonial rule in Nigeria; Colonial administration of
Nigeria). Evolution of Nigeria as a political unit (amalgamation of Nigeria in
1914; formation of political parties in Nigeria; Nationalist movement and
struggle for independence). Nigeria and challenges of nation building (military
intervention in Nigerian politics; Nigerian Civil War). Concept of trade and
economics of selfreliance (indigenous trade and market system; indigenous
apprenticeship system among Nigeria people; trade, skill acquisition and selfreliance). Social justices and national development (law definition and
classification. Judiciary and fundamental rights. Individual, norms and values
(basic Nigeria norms and values, patterns of citizenship acquisition; citizenship
and civic responsibilities; indigenous languages, usage and development;
negative attitudes and conducts. Cultism, kidnapping and other related social
vices). Re-orientation, moral and national values (The 3R’s – Reconstruction,
Rehabilitation and Re-orientation; Reorientation Strategies: Operation Feed the
Nation (OFN), Green Revolution, Austerity Measures, War Against Indiscipline
(WAI), War Against Indiscipline and Corruption (WAIC), Mass Mobilization for
Self-Reliance, Social Justice and Economic Recovery (MAMSER), National
Orientation Agency (NOA). Current socio-political and cultural developments in
Nigeria.
Education 275 New
EDU 101: Introduction to Teaching and Foundations of Education
(2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. state the important roles of teaching as a profession;
2. raise and judge some ethical issues in education;
3. list the intellectual and practical competencies required by the teacher;
4. justify the need for education in the development of a nation;
5. give an account of the history of education from ancient times to the present day
modern education in Nigeria;
6. present an overview of the National Policy on Education;
7. identify the stages of child and adolescent development;
8. state the behaviourist, cognitive and socio-cultural perspectives of learning;
9. enumerate historical and current developments in sociology of education, and
10. highlight the historical and current developments in philosophy of education.
Course Contents
Teaching as a profession. Ethics of the teaching profession. Intellectual and
practical competencies required by the teacher. Link between education and
development. Educational development from ancient times to the present with
particular reference to the evolution of modern education in Nigeria. The
National Policy on Education. Brief treatment of learning theories from the
behaviourist, cognitive and socio cultural perspectives. Child and adolescent
development. Historical and current developments in philosophy of education.
Historical and current developments in sociology of education
COS 101: Introduction to Computing Sciences (3 Units C: LH 30; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
1. trace historical development of computing to the current programmes in the
discipline;
2. distinguish the salient characteristics of the different programmes of the
computing discipline;
3. identify the roles and applications of computers and computing in different areas
of human endeavour;
4. identify and explain the basic components of a computer system;
5. develop basic literacy on the use of computer systems;
6. develop competence on the use of common Office productivity applications; and
7. make purposeful use of the Internet for information gathering, learning and
continuous professional development.
Course Contents
History of computing sciences leading to the different programmes in the
discipline. Characteristics of each programme in computing sciences. Hardware,
Software; and human resources; Integration and application in business and
other segments of society. Information processing and its roles in society;
Students will be required to complete lab assignments using the PC’s operating
system, and several commonly used applications, such as word processors,
:
Education 276 New
spreadsheets, presentations, graphics and other applications. Internet and online resources, browsers, and search engines.
Prerequisite: None
COS 102: Problem Solving (3 Units C: LH 30, PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to
1. explain concepts related to problem solving and identify problem types;
2. identify and explain problem solving methods;
3. exemplify solvable and unsolvable problems;
4. interpret given problems and formulate solutions to them using flowchart,
pseudocode and/or other formalisms;
5. apply appropriate strategies and procedures to arrive at workable solutions to
problems; and
6. develop critical thinking and problem solving skills required throughout the
computing career.
Course Contents
Introduction to the core concepts of computing, problems, and problemsolving. The identification of problems and types of problems (routine problems
and non-routine problems). Method of solving computing problems
(Introduction to Algorithms and heuristics).
Solvable and unsolvable problems. Solution techniques of solving problems
(abstraction, analogy, brainstorming, trial and error, hypothesis testing,
reduction, literal thinking, meansend analysis, method of focal object,
morphological analysis, research, root cause analysis, proof, divide and
conquer). General Problem-solving process. Solution formulation and design:
flowchart, pseudocode, decision table, decision tree. Implementation,
evaluation and refinement.
MTH 101: Elementary Mathematics I (Algebra and
Trigonometry) (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course students should be able to
1. state basic definition of Set, Subset, Union, Intersection, Complements and use
of Venn diagrams;
2. solve quadratic equations;
3. solve trigonometric functions;
4. use various types of numbers; and
5. solve some problems using Binomial theorem.
Course Contents
Elementary set theory, subsets, union, intersection, complements, venn
diagrams. Real numbers; integers, rational and irrational numbers,
mathematical induction, real sequences and series, theory of quadratic
equations, binomial theorem. Complex numbers; algebra of complex numbers;
Education 277 New
the Argand diagram. De-Moivre’s theorem, nth roots of unity. Circular measure,
trigonometric functions of angles of any magnitude, addition and factor
formulae.
PHY 102: General Physics II (Behaviour of Matter) (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course students should be able to
1. explain the concepts of heat and temperature and relate the temperature scales;
2. define, derive, and apply the fundamental thermodynamic relations to thermal
systems;
3. describe and explain the first and second laws of thermodynamics, and the
concept of entropy;
4. state the assumptions of the kinetic theory and apply techniques of describing
macroscopic behaviour;
5. deduce the formalism of thermodynamics and apply it to simple systems in
thermal equilibrium; and
6. describe and determine the effect of forces and deformation of materials and
surfaces.
Course Contents
Heat and Temperature. Temperature scales. Gas laws. General gas equation.
Thermal conductivity. First Law of thermodynamics. Heat, work and internal
energy, reversibility. Thermodynamic processes. Adiabatic, isothermal, isobaric.
Second law of thermodynamics. heat engines and entropy, Zero’s law of
thermodynamics. Kinetic theory of gases. Molecular collisions and mean free
path. Elasticity. Hooke's law, Young's, shear and bulk moduli. Hydrostatics.
Pressure, buoyancy, Archimedes' principles. Bernoulli’s equation and
incompressible fluid flow. Surface tension. Adhesion, cohesion, viscosity,
capillarity, drops and bubbles.

PHY 107: General Practical Physics I (1 Unit C: PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course students should be able to:
1. conduct measurements of some physical quantities;
2. make observations of events, collect and tabulate data;
3. identify and evaluate some common experimental errors;
4. plot and analyse graphs; and
5. draw conclusions from numerical and graphical analysis of data.
Course Contents
This introductory course emphasizes quantitative measurements, the treatment
of measurement errors, and graphical analysis. A variety of experimental
techniques should be employed. The experiments include studies of meters,
the oscilloscope, mechanical systems, electrical and mechanical resonant
systems, light, heat, viscosity and others, covered in PHY 101 and PHY 102.
However, emphasis should be placed on the basic physical techniques for
observation, measurements, data collection, analysis and deduction.
:
Education 278 New
GST 212: Philosophy, Logic And Human Existence (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
A student who has successfully gone through this course should be able to:
1. explain the basic features of philosophy as an academic discipline;
2. identify the main branches of philosophy & the centrality of logic in philosophical
discourse;
3. explain the elementary rules of reasoning;
4. distinguish between valid and invalid arguments;
5. think critically and assess arguments in texts, conversations and day-to-day
discussions;
6. critically asses the rationality or otherwise of human conduct under different
existential conditions;
7. develop the capacity to extrapolate and deploy expertise in logic to other areas
of knowledge; and
8. guide his or her actions, using the knowledge and expertise acquired in
philosophy and logic.
Course Contents
Scope of philosophy; notions, meanings, branches and problems of philosophy.
Logic as an indispensable tool of philosophy. Elements of syllogism, symbolic
logic— the first nine rules of inference. Informal fallacies, laws of thought,
nature of arguments. Valid and invalid arguments, logic of form and logic of
content — deduction, induction and inferences. Creative and critical thinking.
Impact of philosophy on human existence. Philosophy and politics, philosophy
and human conduct, philosophy and religion, philosophy and human values,
philosophy and character molding.
Education 279 New
ENT211: Entrepreneurship and Innovation (2 Units C: LH15; PH45)
Leaning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. explain the concepts and theories of entrepreneurship, entrepreneurships
opportunity seeking, new value creation, and risk taking;
2. state the characteristics of an entrepreneur;
3. analyse the importance of micro and small businesses in wealth creation,
employment, and financial independence;
4. engage in entrepreneurial thinking;
5. identify key elements in innovation;
6. describe stages in enterprise formation, partnership and networking including
business planning;
7. describe contemporary entrepreneurial issues in Nigeria, Africa and the rest of
the world;
8. state the basic principles of e-commerce;
9. demonstrate ability to perform reflective and creative thinking; and 10. apply the
basics of a business plan.
Course Contents
Concept of Entrepreneurship (Entrepreneurship, Entrepreneurships / Corporate
Entrepreneurship,). Theories, Rationale and relevance of Entrepreneurship
(Schumpeterian and other perspectives, Risk-Taking, Necessity and
opportunity-based entrepreneurship and Creative destruction). Characteristics
of Entrepreneurs (Opportunity seeker, Risk taker, Natural and Nurtured,
Problem solver and change agent, Innovator and creative thinker).
Entrepreneurial thinking (Critical thinking, Reflective thinking, and Creative
thinking). Innovation (Concept of innovation, Dimensions of innovation,
Change and innovation, Knowledge and innovation). Enterprise formation,
partnership and networking (Basics of Business Plan, Forms of business
ownership, Business registration and Forming alliances and join ventures).
Contemporary Entrepreneurship Issues (Knowledge, Skills and Technology,
Intellectual property, Virtual office, Networking). Entrepreneurship in Nigeria
(Biography of inspirational Entrepreneurs, Youth and women entrepreneurship,
Entrepreneurship support institutions, Youth enterprise networks and
Environmental and cultural barriers to entrepreneurship). Basic principles of ecommerce.
EDU 201: Curriculum, Curriculum Delivery and Teaching
Methods (2 Units C: LH30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. explain at an appropriate level of confidence the meaning and types of
curriculum;
2. describe the process of curriculum development; analyse and critique the
Nigerian Core curricula as guide to curricula delivery;
3. use different methods in the delivery of curriculum content;
4. identify local epistemologies and context and the use of CTCA in the Nigerian
context;
:
Education 280 New
5. plan and schedule lessons as well as monitor and evaluate the outcome of each
lesson; 6. identify and use learning resources and media and improvise, when
necessary;
7. manage classrooms under different conditions and address the
needs of individual students, especially, those with special needs
including the gifted;
8. demonstrate skills in ICT, set up and manage online classes; 9.
demonstrate the application of general classroom management;
and
10. skilfully attend to students with special needs.
Course Contents
Definition and types of curriculum. The curriculum development process. The
Nigerian core curricula. Curriculum delivery to include general teaching
methods and strategies: lecture, class discussion, demonstration, problemsolving, cooperative learning and guided-discovery, concept mapping,
metacognition, argumentation, project-based learning, competency-based
learning, culturo-techno-contextual approach (CTCA). Developing the lesson
plan/note. Assessment of learning. Resources for teaching and improvisation.
General classroom management. Teaching in a 21st century classroom. Setting
up and managing online classes. Attending to students with special needs.
COS 201: Computer Programming I (3 Units C: LH 30, PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to
1. identify different programming paradigms and their approach to programming;
2. write programs using basic data types and strings;
3. design and implement programming problems using selection;
4. design and implement programming problems using loops;
5. use and implement classes as data abstractions in an object-oriented approach;
6. implement simple exception handling in programs;
7. develop programs with input/output from text files; and
8. design and implement programming problems involving arrays.
Course Contents
Introduction to computer programming. Functional programming; Declarative
programming; Logic programming; Scripting languages. Introduction to objectorientation as a technique for modeling computation. Introduction of a typical
object-oriented language, such as Java; Basic data types, variables,
expressions, assignment statements and operators; Basic objectoriented
concepts: abstraction; objects; classes; methods; parameter passing;
encapsulation. Introduction to Strings and string processing; Simple I/O;
control structures; Arrays; Simple recursive algorithms; inheritance;
polymorphism
Lab work: Programming assignments involving hands-on practice in the
design and implementation of simple algorithms such as finding the average,
standard deviation, searching and sorting. Practice in developing and tracing
simple recursive algorithms.
Education 281 New
Developing programs involving inheritance and polymorphism.
Prerequisite: COS 102 Problem Solving
CSC 203: Discrete Structures (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, the students will be able to
1. convert logical statements from informal language to propositional and predicate
logic expressions.
2. describe the strengths and limitations of propositional and predicate logic.
3. outline the basic structure of each proof technique (direct proof, proof by
contradiction, and induction) described in this unit.
4. apply each of the proof techniques (direct proof, proof by contradiction, and
induction) correctly in the construction of a sound argument.
5. apply the pigeonhole principle in the context of a formal proof.
6. compute permutations and combinations of a set, and interpret the meaning in
the context of the particular application.
7. map real-world applications to appropriate counting formalisms, such as
determining the number of ways to arrange people around a table, subject to
constraints on the seating arrangement, or the number of ways to determine
certain hands in cards (such as, a full house).
8. solve a variety of basic recurrence relations.
Course Contents
Propositional Logic. Predicate Logic. Sets. Functions. Sequences and Summation. Proof
Techniques. Mathematical induction. Inclusion-exclusion and Pigeonhole principles.
Permutations and Combinations (with and without repetitions). The Binomial Theorem.
Discrete Probability. Recurrence Relations.
IFT 211: Digital Logic Design (2 Units C: LH 15: PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students will be able to:
1. explain why everything is data, including instructions, in computers;
2. describe how negative integers, fixed-length numbers, and non-numeric data are
represented;
3. convert numerical data from one format to another;
4. describe computations as a system characterized by a known set of
configurations with transitions from one unique configuration (state) to another
(state);
5. describe the distinction between systems whose output is only a function of their
input
(Combinational) and those with memory/history (Sequential);
6. describe a computer as a state machine that interprets machine instructions;
7. articulate that there are many equivalent representations of computer
functionality, including logical expressions and gates, and be able to use
mathematical expressions to describe the functions of simple combinational and
sequential circuits; and
:
Education 282 New
8. design the basic building blocks of a computer: arithmetic-logic unit (gate-level),
registers (gate-level), central processing unit (register transfer-level), and
memory (register transfer-level).
Course Contents
Fundamental constructs and concepts underlying computer hardware and software
which includes:
Number systems, binary arithmetic, codes, gates, Boolean expressions. Boolean
algebra. Manipulation and minimization of completely and incompletely
specified Boolean functions. Boolean switching function synthesis. Iterative
arrays, sequential machines. Physical properties of gates: fan-in, fan-out,
propagation delay. Timing diagrams and tri-state drivers. Combinational circuits
design using multiplexers, decoders, comparators, and adders. Sequential
circuit analysis and design, basic flip-flops, clocking, and timing diagrams.
Registers, counters, RAMs, ROMs, PLAs, PLDs, and FPGA.s.
IFT 212: Computer Architecture and Organization (2 Units C: LH 15,
PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to
1. explain different instruction formats, such as addresses per instruction and
variable length vs. fixed length formats;
2. explain the organization of the classical von Neumann machine and its major
functional units;
3. explain how subroutine calls are handled at the assembly level;
4. explain the basic concepts of interrupts and I/O operations;
5. write simple assembly language program segments;
6. show how fundamental high-level programming constructs are implemented at
the machine-language level;
7. compare alternative implementation of datapaths;
8. discuss the concept of control points and the generation of control signals using
hardwired or microprogrammed implementations;
9. describe how the use of memory hierarchy (cache, virtual memory) is used to
reduce the effective memory latency; and
10. explain how interrupts are used to implement I/O control and data transfers.
Course Contents
Instruction format and types, memory and I/O instructions, dataflow,
arithmetic, and flow control instructions, addressing modes, stack operations,
and interrupts. Datapath and control unit design. RTL, microprogramming, and
hardwired control. Practice of assembly language programming. Memory
hierarchy, cache memory, virtual memory. I/O fundamentals.
Interrupt structures.
Suggested Lab work
Programming assignments to practice MS-DOS batch programming, Assembly
Process, Debugging, Procedures, Keyboard input, Video Output, File and Disk
I/O and Data Structure. Instruction and arithmetic pipelining, superscalar
Education 283 New
architecture. Reduced Instruction Set Computers. Parallel architectures and
interconnection networks.
Prerequisite: IFT 211 Digital Logic Design
MTH 201: Mathematical Methods 1 (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course students should be able to
1. describe Real-valued functions of a real variable;
2. solve some problems using Mean value Theorem and Taylor Series expansion;
and
3. evaluate Line Integral, Surface Integral and Volume Integrals.
Course Contents
Real-valued functions of a real variable. Review of differentiation and
integration and their applications. Mean value theorem. Taylor series. Realvalued functions of two and three variables. Partial derivatives chain rule,
extrema, Lagrangian multipliers. Increments, differentials and linear
approximations. Evaluation of line, integrals. Multiple integrals.
MTH 202: Elementary Differential Equations (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. define the following: order and degree of a differential equation;
2. describe some techniques for solving first and second order linear and nonlinear
equations; and
3. solve some problems related to geometry and physics.
Course Contents
Derivation of differential equations from primitive, geometry and physics order
and degree of differential equation. Techniques for solving first and second
order linear and non-linear equations. Solutions of systems of first order linear
equations. Finite linear difference equations. Application to geometry and
physics.
SEN 201: Introduction to Software Engineering (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to
1. explain the concept of the software life cycle and comprehend the phases of
requirements analysis, design, development, testing and maintenance.
2. differentiate amongst the various software development models.
3. use UML for object-oriented analysis and design.
4. describe different design architectures.
5. undertake a group project involving requirements analysis, design, programming
and testing.
Course Contents
:
Education 284 New
Software engineering concepts and principles; design, development and testing
of software systems. Introduction to software life cycle. Requirements, design
and testing. Review of principles of object orientation. Object oriented analysis
using UML. Frameworks and APIs. Introduction to the client-server
architecture. Analysis, design and programming of a teamproject including user
interface considerations.
CSC 299: SIWES I (3 Units C: PH 135)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this training, students should be able to:
1. explain how a typical computer firm/unit operates;
2. describe the various assignments carried out and the skills acquired during the
SIWES period; and
3. submit a comprehensive report on the knowledge acquired and the experience
gained during the exercise.
Course Contents
Students are attached to private and public organisations for a period of three
months during the second year session long break with a view to making them
acquire practical experience and to the extent possible, develop skills in all
areas of Computer Science. Students are supervised during the training period
and shall be expected to keep records designed for the purpose of monitoring
their performance. They are also expected to submit a report on the experience
gained and defend their reports.
300 Level
GST 312: Peace and Conflict Resolution (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. analyse the concepts of peace, conflict and security;
2. list major forms, types and root causes of conflict and violence;
3. differentiate between conflict and terrorism;
4. enumerate security and peace building strategies; and
5. describe roles of international organisations, media and traditional institutions in
peace building.
Course Contents
Concepts of Peace, Conflict and Security in a multi-ethnic nation. Types and
Theories of Conflicts: Ethnic, Religious, Economic, Geo-political Conflicts;
Structural Conflict Theory, Realist Theory of Conflict, Frustration-Aggression
Conflict Theory. Root causes of Conflict and Violence in Africa: Indigene and
settlers Phenomenon; Boundaries/boarder disputes; Political disputes; Ethnic
disputes and rivalries; Economic Inequalities; Social disputes; Nationalist
Movements and Agitations; Selected Conflict Case Studies – Tiv-Junkun; Zango
Kartaf, Chieftaincy and Land disputes. Peace Building, Management of Conflicts
Education 285 New
and Security: Peace & Human Development. Approaches to Peace & Conflict
Management --- (Religious, Government, Community Leaders and others).
Elements of Peace Studies and Conflict
Resolution: Conflict dynamics assessment Scales: Constructive & Destructive. Justice
and Legal framework: Concepts of Social Justice; The Nigeria Legal System. Insurgency
and Terrorism. Peace Mediation and Peace Keeping. Peace & Security Council
(International, National and Local levels) Agents of Conflict resolution – Conventions,
Treaties Community Policing: Evolution and Imperatives. Alternative Dispute
Resolution, ADR. Dialogue b). Arbitration, c). Negotiation d). Collaboration. Roles
of International Organizations in Conflict Resolution. (a). The United Nations, UN and
its Conflict Resolution Organs. (b). The African Union & Peace Security Council (c).
ECOWAS in Peace Keeping. Media and Traditional Institutions in Peace Building.
Managing Post-Conflict Situations/Crisis: Refugees. Internally Displaced Persons, IDPs.
The role of NGOs in Post-Conflict Situations/Crisis.
ENT 312: Venture Creation (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students, through case studies and practical approaches,
should be able to:
1. describe the key steps in venture creation;
2. spot opportunities in problems and in high potential sectors regardless of
geographical location;
3. state how original products, ideas, and concepts are developed;
4. develop business concept for further incubation or pitching for funding;
5. identify key sources of entrepreneurial finance;
6. implement the requirements for establishing and managing micro and small
enterprises;
7. conduct entrepreneurial marketing and e-commerce;
8. apply a wide variety of emerging technological solutions to entrepreneurship; and
9. appreciate why ventures fail due to lack of planning and poor implementation.
Course Contents
Opportunity Identification (Sources of business opportunities in Nigeria,
Environmental scanning, Demand and supply gap/unmet needs/market
gaps/Market Research, Unutilised resources, Social and climate conditions and
Technology adoption gap). New business development (business planning,
market research). Entrepreneurial Finance (Venture capital, Equity finance,
Micro finance, Personal savings, Small business investment organizations and
Business plan competition). Entrepreneurial marketing and e-commerce
(Principles of marketing, Customer Acquisition & Retention, B2B, C2C and B2C
models of e-commerce, First Mover Advantage, E-commerce business models
and Successful E-Commerce Companies,). Small Business Management/Family
Business: Leadership & Management, Basic book keeping, Nature of family
business and Family Business Growth Model. Negotiation and Business
communication (Strategy and tactics of negotiation/bargaining, Traditional and
modern business communication methods). Opportunity Discovery
Demonstrations (Business idea generation presentations, Business idea
:
Education 286 New
Contest, Brainstorming sessions, Idea pitching). Technological Solutions (The
Concept of Market/Customer Solution, Customer Solution and Emerging
Technologies, Business Applications of New Technologies - Artificial Intelligence
(AI), Virtual/Mixed Reality (VR), Internet of Things (IoTs), Blockchain, Cloud
Computing, Renewable Energy and others. Digital Business and E-Commerce
Strategies).
EDU 301: Teaching Practice I (3 Units C: PH 135)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to demostrate:
1. knowledge of the subject matter;
2. the necessary Pedagogical skills;
3. acquired understanding of child psychology;
4. the needed attitude towards teaching;
5. proper use of instructional facilities;
6. knowledge of individual differences in actual classroom situations and how to use
this knowledge to assist children in real time; and
7. effective classroom management skills.
Course Contents
Effective and responsive teaching practices and interactions as key for all
learning in professional teacher preparation. The importance of teaching
practice in providing students with an opportunity to apply their pedagogical
knowledge and skills in practice. Practical implementation of teaching and
learning strategies in the classroom, as applied to the subject area. Microteaching prior to students embarking on the exercise.
EDU 302: Educational Measurements, Tests, Research Methods and
Statistics (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. measure and assess learning outcomes and use the results in decision making
and judgments;
2. identify the different domains of learning; develop and use appropriate
instruments for measuring each;
3. identify the different kinds of data that can be yielded in different contexts and
the appropriate statistical tool for analyzing each type of data;
4. explain the meaning, aim, types, role and processes of research in educational
settings. 5. acquire communication skills and skills in reporting of research;
6. carry out hypothesis testing, and employ the knowledge of critical values and
error in interpretation of results and making of inferences;
7. gain skills in the use of IBM-SPSS and other relevant packages in the analysis of
data; and
8. judge and address ethical issues in research.
Course Contents
Education 287 New
Meaning of research, research designs. Problem identification, background and
study justification. Theoretical/conceptual framework and review of literature.
Sample and sampling techniques. Types of data, data gathering, data
processing, data analysis and interpretation. Probability, critical values and
error and their place in inferences. Reporting in educational context. Ethical
considerations (political, economic religious and cultural) in research. The use
of computers in educational research, use of SPSS in data analysis.
Measurements and instrumentation. Development of tests, test blue prints,
item analysis, reliability and validity of instruments. Domains of learning and
taxonomy of cognitive outcomes.
CSC 301: Data Structures (3 Units C: LH 30, PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to
1. discuss the appropriate use of built-in data structures.
2. apply object-oriented concepts (inheritance, polymorphism, design patterns and
others) in software design;
3. implement various data structures and their algorithms, and apply them in
implementing simple applications;
4. choose the appropriate data structure for modelling a given problem;
5. analyze simple algorithms and determine their efficiency using big-O notation;
and
6. apply the knowledge of data structures to other application domains like data
compression and memory management.
Course Contents
Primitive types, Arrays, Records Strings and String processing, Data
representation in memory, Stack and Heap allocation, Queues, TREES.
Implementation Strategies for stack, queues, trees. Run time Storage
management; Pointers and References, linked structures.
CSC 308: Operating System (3 Units C: LH 30, PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to
1. recognize operating system types and structure;
2. describe OS support for processes and threads;
3. recognize CPU scheduling, synchronization, and deadlock;
4. resolve OS issues related to synchronization and failure for distributed systems;
5. explain OS support for virtual memory, disk scheduling, I/O, and file systems;
6. identify security and protection issues in computer systems; and
7. use C and Unix commands, examine behaviour and performance of Linux, and
develop various system programs under Linux to make use of OS concepts related
to process synchronization, shared memory, mailboxes, file systems and others.
Course Contents
Fundamentals of operating systems design and implementation. History and
evolution of operating systems. Types of operating systems. Operating system
:
Education 288 New
structures. Process management: processes, threads, CPU scheduling, process
synchronization. Memory management and virtual memory. File systems; I/O
systems; Security and protection; Distributed systems; Case studies.
Suggested Lab Work:
Practical hands-on engagement to facilitate understanding of the material
taught in the course. All the process, memory, file and directory management
issues will be demonstrated under the LINUX operating system. Also UNIX
commands will be briefly discussed. Alternatively, hands-on exposure may be
through the use of operating systems developed for teaching, like TempOS,
Nachos, Xinu or MiniOS. Another possibility is through programming exercises
that implement and simulate algorithms taught. Simulation of CPU scheduling
algorithms, producer-consumer problem, memory allocation algorithms, file
organization techniques, deadlock algorithms and disk scheduling algorithms.
Prerequisite: CSC 301 Data Structures
CSC 309: Artificial Intelligence (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. explain AI fundamentals, concepts, goals, types, techniques, branches,
applications,
2. understand AI technology and tools.
3. discuss intelligent agents, their performance, examples, faculties, environment
and architectures, and determine the characteristics of a given problem that
an intelligent
4. system must solve.
5. describe the Turing test and the “Chinese Room” thought experiment, and
differentiate between the concepts of optimal reasoning/behaviour and humanlike reasoning/behaviour.
6. describe the role of heuristics and the trade-offs among completeness, optimality,
time complexity, and space complexity.
7. analyze the types of search and their applications in AI and describe the problem
of combinatorial explosion of search space and its consequences.
8. demonstrate knowledge representation, semantic network and frames along with
their applicable uses.
9. practice Natural Language Processing, translate a natural language (such as
English) sentence into a predicate logic statement, convert a logic statement into
clause form, apply resolution to a set of logic statements to answer a query.
10. analyze programming languages for AI and expert systems technology, and
employ application domains of AI.
Course Contents
Overview of Artificial Intelligence. History of AI. Goals of AI. AI Technique.
Types of AI. Branches and applications of AI. Advantages and Disadvantages.
Introduction to Intelligent Agents. Agent Performance, Examples of Agents,
Agent Faculties, Rationality, Agent Environment. Agent Architectures. Search.
General Classes of AI Search Algorithm Problems. Problem Solving by Search.
Types of AI Search Techniques and Strategies. Introduction to the types of
Education 289 New
problems and techniques in AI. Problem-Solving methods. Major structures
used in AI programs. Knowledge Representation. KR and Reasoning
Challenges. KR Languages. Knowledge representation techniques such as
predicate logic, non-monotonic logic, and probabilistic reasoning. Semantic
Network - types of relationships, semantic network inheritance, types and
components. Introduction to Frames. Natural Language Processing (NLP).
Introduction to natural language understanding and various syntactic and
semantic structures. Introduction to Expert Systems - characteristics,
components, types, requirements, technology, development. Programming
Languages for AI. Introduction to computer image recognition.
CSC 322: Computer Science Innovation and New Technologies (2 Units C:
LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to
1. identify the key elements of the process of founding a start-up firm;
2. state and explain the different aspects and challenges of entrepreneurship;
3. list and explain the skills required for technology-driven innovation and
entrepreneurship in the age of disruptive technologies;
4. generate an innovative business and build a business plan around it;
5. identify different strategies for raising capital to support an innovation;
6. employ modern technologies to enhance or disrupt an existing business model;
and
7. assess and critique a given business proposal from different perspectives.
Course Contents
Aims to equip students with concepts and skills required for developing,
planning and managing technology-based innovations. Topics covered include
different aspects and challenges of entrepreneurship, idea development and
validation, strategy, building a business plan, raising capital and growing a
business.

CYB 201: Introduction to Cyber Security and Strategy (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to:
1. explain cybersecurity concepts, its methods, elements, and terminologies of
cyber security -cyber, security, threat, attack, defence, and operations;
2. describe common cyber-attacks and threats, cyber security issues,
challenges and proffered solutions, and build an enhanced view of main
actors of cyberspace and cyber operations;
3. apply the techniques for identifying, detecting, and defending against
cybersecurity threats, attacks and protecting information assets;
4. explain the impact of cybersecurity on civil and military institutions, privacy,
business and government applications;
5. identify the methods and motives of cybersecurity incident perpetrators,
and the countermeasures employed by organizations and agencies to
:
Education 290 New
prevent and detect those incidences and software application
vulnerabilities; and
6. state the ethical obligations of security professionals, evaluate cybersecurity
and national security strategies to the typologies of cyber-attacks that
require policy tools and domestic response, and define the cybersecurity
requirements and strategies evolving in the face of big risk.
Course Contents
Basic concepts: cyber, security, confidentiality, integrity, availability,
authentication, access control, non-repudiation and fault-tolerant
methodologies for implementing security. Security policies, best current
practices, testing security, and incident response, Risk management, disaster
recovery and access control. Basic cryptography and software application
vulnerabilities. Evolution of cyber-attacks. Operating system protection
mechanisms, intrusion detection systems, basic formal models of security,
cryptography, steganography, network and distributed system security, denial
of service (and other) attack strategies, worms, viruses, transfer of funds/value
across networks, electronic voting, secure applications. Cybersecurity policy
and guidelines. Government regulation of information technology. Main actors
of cyberspace and cyber operations. Impact of cybersecurity on civil and
military institutions, privacy, business and government applications;
examination of the dimensions of networks, protocols, operating systems, and
associated applications. Methods and motives of cybersecurity incident
perpetrators, and the countermeasures employed by organizations and
agencies to prevent and detect those incidences. Ethical obligations of security
professionals. Trends and development in cybersecurity. Software application
vulnerabilities. Evolution of cybersecurity and national security strategies,
requirements to the typologies of cyber-attacks that require policy tools and
domestic response. Cybersecurity strategies evolving in the face of big risk.
Role of standards and frameworks.
DTS 304: Data Management (3 Units C: LH 30; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. identify the careers/roles associated with information management;
2. explain the characteristics that distinguish the database approach from the
approach of programming with data files;
3. describe the components of a database system and give examples of their use.
4. describe concepts in modeling notation;
5. describe the differences between relational and semi-structured data models;
6. apply the modeling concepts and notation of the relational data model;
7. explain and demonstrate the concepts of entity integrity constraint and referential
integrity constrain;
8. apply queries, query optimizations and functional dependencies in relational
databases;
9. describe properties of normal forms and explain the impact of normalization on
the efficiency of database operations;
Education 291 New
10. describe database security and integrity issues and their importance in database
design; and
11. explain the concepts of concurrency control and recovery mechanisms in
databases.
Course Contents
Information Management Concepts: Information storage & retrieval,
Information management applications, Information capture and
representation, analysis & indexing, search, retrieval, information privacy;
integrity, security; scalability, efficiency and effectiveness. Introduction to
database systems: Components of database systems DBMS functions,
Database architecture and data independence use of database query language.
Conceptual models. Relational data models. Semi-structured data models.
Relational theory and languages. Database Design. Database security and
integrity. Introduction to query processing and optimization. Introduction to
concurrency and recovery.
Suggested Lab work
Programming assignments to learn database design using CASE tools.
Introduction to backend/Server-based Relational Database Management
System (RDBMS). Learning Standard SQL (interactive/embedded).
Introduction and programming assignments on Front-End tools. Programming
team projects to design and develop real life database systems using the
learned tools.
Prerequisite: CSC 203 Discrete Structures I

ICT 305: Data Communication Systems and Network (3 Units C: LH 30,
PH 45)
Learning outcomes
At the end of this course, students should know
1. data transmission over
layered networks; 2. internet
technologies and protocols; and
3. network Operating System.
Course Contents
Types and sources of data, simple communications network, transmission
definitions, one way transmission, half duplex transmission, transmission
codes, transmission modes, parallel transmission, serial transmission, bit
synchronization, character synchronization, character synchronization,
synchronous transmission, asynchronous transmission, efficiency of
transmission, error detection methods and data compression. Protocols:
Introduction to network protocol. Seven Layer ISO-OSI standard protocols and
network architecture.
Transport protocols, session services protocols, and other protocols. Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineering 802 standards. Error control and Data
Compression: Forward Error Control; error detection methods; parity checking;
linear block codes, cyclic redundancy checking; feedback error control, data
compression, Huffman coding and dynamic Huffman coding. Local Area
Networks: medium access control techniques – Ethernet, token bus and token
:
Education 292 New
ring; LAN standards; fibre distributed data interface, metropolitan area
network. Peerto-peer, Client Server. Client-Server Requirements: GUI design
standards, interface independence, platform independence, transaction
processing, connectivity, reliability, backup, and recovery mechanisms.
Information Network Software; Features and benefits of major recovery
mechanisms. Information Network Software: features and benefits of major
Network Operating Systems. Network OS: (such as, Novell NetWare,
UNIX/LINUX, OS/2 & Windows NT). TCP/IP and Network OS. INTERNET:
Definition, architecture, services, Internet addressing. Internet protocol, IPv4,
IPv6. Internet programming, Intranet. System administration, and security
issues.
CSC 399: SIWES II (3 Units C: PH 135)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this training, students should be able to:
1. explain how a typical computer firm/unit operates;
2. describe the various assignments carried out and the skills acquired during the
SIWES period; and
3. submit a comprehensive report on the knowledge acquired and the experience
gained during the exercise.
Course Contents
Students are attached to private and public organisations for a period of three
months during the second year session long break with a view to making them
acquire practical experience and to the extent possible, develop skills in all
areas of Computer Science. Students are supervised during the training period
and shall be expected to keep records designed for the purpose of monitoring
their performance. They are also expected to submit a report on the experience
gained and defend their reports.
400 LEVEL
EDU 400: Project (3 Units C: PH 135)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. identify researchable project topics on contemporary problems in relevant subject
specialization in education; and
2. search and review literature pertinent to identified topical issues.
Course Contents
Application of knowledge and skills acquired in research methods, statistics and
evaluation in identifying and proffering solutions to educational problems.
Working independently under the guidance of a Project Supervisor. Planning
and execution of a well-conceptualized research and presenting a written report
on the study conducted.
EDU 401: Teaching Practice II (3 Units C: PH 135)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to demonstrate:
1. knowledge of the subject matter;
2. the necessary Pedagogical skills;
3. acquired understanding of child psychology;
4. the needed attitude towards teaching;
5. proper use of instructional facilities;
6. knowledge of individual differences in actual classroom situations and how to use
this knowledge to assist children in real time; and
7. effective classroom management skills.
Course Contents
Effective and responsive teaching practices and interactions are key for all
learning in professional teacher preparation. The importance of teaching
practice in providing the students with an opportunity to apply their pedagogical
knowledge and skills in practice. Practical implementation of teaching and
learning strategies in the classroom, as applied to the subject area. Microteaching before students embark on the exercise.
CSC 401: Algorithms and Complexity Analysis (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. explain the use of big O, omega, and theta notation to describe the amount of
work done by an algorithm;
2. use big O, omega, and theta notation to give asymptotic upper, lower, and tight
bounds on time and space complexity of algorithms;
3. determine the time and space complexity of simple algorithms;
4. deduce recurrence relations that describe the time complexity of recursively
defined algorithms;
5. solve elementary recurrence relations;
6. for each of the strategies (brute-force, greedy, divide-and-conquer, recursive
backtracking, and dynamic programming), identify a practical example to which
it would apply;
7. use pattern matching to analyze substrings; and
8. use numerical approximation to solve mathematical problems, such as finding
the roots of a polynomial.
Course Contents
Basic algorithmic analysis: Asymptotic analysis of Upper and average
complexity bounds; standard Complexity Classes Time and space trade-offs in
algorithms analysis recursive algorithms. Algorithmic Strategies: Fundamental
computing algorithms: Numerical algorithms, sequential and binary search
algorithms; sorting algorithms, Binary Search trees, Hash tables, graphs and
its representation. Prerequisite: CSC 203 Discrete Structures I
INS 401: Project Management (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of this course, students should be able to
1. describe project management planning;
2. describe project scheduling;
3. explain management of project resources;
4. discuss project procurement, monitoring and execution; and
5. explain project communication and time management.
Course Contents
Introduction to Project Management; The Project Management Lifecycle:
Project management and systems development or acquisition, The project
management context, Technology and techniques to support the project
management lifecycle, and Project management processes; Managing Project
Teams: Project team planning, Motivating team members, Leadership, power
and conflict in project teams, and Managing global project teams; Managing
Project Communication and enhancing team communication; Project Initiation
and Planning; Managing Project Scope: Project initiation, How organizations
choose projects, Activities, and Developing the project charter; Managing
Project Scheduling: Common problems in project scheduling, and Techniques
for project scheduling; Managing Project Resources: Types of resources
(human, capital, time), and Techniques for managing resources; Project quality
and tools to manage project quality; Managing project risk and tools for
managing project risk; Managing Project Procurement: Alternatives to systems
development, External acquisition, Outsourcing-domestic and offshore, Steps
in the procurement process, and Managing the procurement process; Project
Execution, Control and Closure: Managing project execution, Monitoring
progress and managing change, Documentation and communication, and
Common problems in project execution; Managing Project Control and Closure:
Obtaining information, Cost control, Change control, Administrative closure,
Personnel closure, Contractual closure and Project auditing
CSC 402: Ethics and Legal Issues in Computer Science (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. understand laws and regulations related to ethics;
2. identify and explain relevant codes of ethics for computing practice;
3. identify social and ethical issues in different areas of computing practice;
4. review real-life ethical cases and be able to develop ethical resolutions and
policies;
5. explain the consequences of ignoring and non-compliance with
ethical provisions; and
6. develop a sound methodology in resolving ethical conflicts and crisis.
Course Contents
Addresses social, ethical, legal and managerial issues in the application of
Computer Science to the information technology industry. Through seminars
and case studies, human issues confronting Computer Science graduates
will be addressed. Topics include managerial and personal ethics, computer
security, privacy, software reliability, personal responsibility for the quality of
work, intellectual property, environment and health concerns, and fairness in
the workplace.
