EAE 402: Evaluation of Adult Education Programmes (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. demonstrate knowledge of concepts of evaluation in education;
2. describe types and techniques of evaluation of adult education programmes;
3. identify different aspects of adult education programmes that can be evaluated;
4. list and explain applicability of various instruments to use for evaluation of Adult Education
Programmes;
5. suggest how and apply ICT techniques in evaluative study of Adult Education Programmes
in Nigeria; and
6. demonstrate practically an evaluation of a Nigerian adult education programme/project.
Course Contents
Concepts of evaluation in education. Different aspects of the programmes to be evaluated.
Different evaluation instruments. Goals and purposes of evaluation. General principles and
foci of formative and summative evaluation. Selected types of evaluative studies. Surveys, the
case study, qualitative and quantitative. Evaluation of design programme content materials,
operation, and evaluation of impact. An overview of evaluative instruments suitable for adult
education programmes in Nigeria. Review of Adult education programmes evaluation in
Nigeria.
EAE 403: ICT and Communication Media in Adult Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the meaning of major ICT concepts;
2. describe the significance of ICT in the promotion of teaching and learning adult education;
3. situate the importance of communication media in adult education;
4. identify various mass media tools in contemporary society;
5. identify the advantages and limitations of certain mass media tools in adult education;
and
6. describe mass media personnel and techniques for effective delivery of adult education
programmes.
Course Contents

Education 74 New
Major concepts in ICT. The use of ICT in media and adult education. Tools for storing and
transmitting educational information to adult learners. Mass media tools including print media
(newspapers, magazines, ) and electronic media (radio, television film, internet) and their
applications. Advantages and limitations of those media tools. Production techniques and
system utilization. Mass media personnel. Feedback and evaluation of programmes.
EAE 411: Primer Construction and Research in Adult Literacy (2 Units C : LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. describe different types of primers used in literacy education;
2. state methods, strategies needed to construct and produce a primer;
3. investigate and list what subject matter would be of interest to adults in your
neighbourhood;
4. construct a primer with a group containing specified features;
5. justify the use of technological devices for the construction and production of primer; 6.
discuss the use of a primer for adult instruction; and
7. explain the benefit of research in adult education to primer construction.
Course Contents
Different types of primers. Issue of scarcity of suitable primers. Selection of contents, choice
of approach-whole word, phonology, drill, syllabic. The methods, strategies and principles of
how literacy primer can be constructed and used for adult education purposes. Paucity of
relevant research to feed the primer construction. Group primer construction exercises for
critiquing. Technological devices to harvest and harness materials of interest and relevance
to adult learners. Development and utilization of skills for technical, editorial, collation, binding
and other skills useful for primer construction expertise.
EAE 412: Contemporary Issues in Literacy and Vocational Skills Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. identify some local and contemporary issues in literacy education;
2. state the policy issues in Nigeria and compare with another West African country;
3. explain how literacy and vocational skills are important for community and national
development;
4. show how different communities and governments are tackling these issues;
5. suggest ways that any selected issues can be handled in Nigeria; and
6. discuss how to network and share ideas with other locations and countries for solutions.
Course Contents
Review of the importance of literacy and vocational skills in national, international and
sustainable development. Contemporary, global and local issues in literacy and vocational
skills development. Curriculum content and relevance, training, use of ICT devices and
certification issues. Lack of interest, negative attitudes, scarcity of trained personnel,
standardization of training, facilities and resources. Existing policies and gaps. Issues of
certification -codification, transferability. Career structure, job employment and
commensurate remuneration. Funding, infrastructure, safety, personnel and expected

:

Education 75 New
economic, social, changes in the community. Status in the community. The intervention of
IDPs -UNESCO, ECOWAS. Forward-looking resolution of issues.
EAE 421: Sociology of Development (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students will be able to:
1. explain the meaning of development, human development, societal development;
2. state the factors that bring about change and the progressive nature of development;
3. enumerate the problems of translating policy to implementation in community
development;
4. imagine and suggest ways of planning and effecting development beneficial to Nigerian
communities in future; and
5. compare and contrast factors that affect human and economic development in a
developed and developing country.
Course Contents
The nature and meaning of development. Concept of development of the society in
multidimensional ways. Human and economic development within a dynamic, structured

Education 76 New
society. Factors and forces of change and the way they affect different groups and institutions
within the society. Current conceptual issues, practical development issues.
EAE 422: Needs Analysis and Evaluation of Community Development (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the meaning and usefulness of needs analysis for community development;
2. devise and justify a stepwise plan for needs analysis of a known community;
3. state what areas and targets can be selected for study in a typical Nigerian community;
4. list and describe the tools for evaluating community projects;
5. find and read up for critiquing reported cases of community project; and 6. participate in
group simulation of community project.
Course Contents
The nature, purpose, necessity and structure of community needs analyses as foundation for
planned intervention. Evaluation of intervention development projects. Example of a stepwise
plan and strategy requirements, needs analysis, goals, aspirations resources for community
development. The tools for evaluating community life and projects.Critiquing, simulation or
evaluation of a community project.Application to Nigerian environment.
EAE 431: Adult Education and Integrated Social Development (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. demonstrate the contribution of adult education and enlightenment to the social
development of communities;
2. relate theories of social change to social development of society; and
3. enhance their capacity to use adult education for social development in Nigeria.
Course Contents
Basic concepts of adult education and social development as a result of enlightenment and
education. Theories of social change. Educational reforms and social change. The role of adult
education in improvement of quality of life. Management of social change. The social change
agent. Case studies. Nature, problems and future of social development and adult education
role in Nigeria.
EAE 432: Basic Processes in Facilitating Extension (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the basic processes in facilitating extension;
2. identify the tools and resources that facilitate extension;
3. discuss the challenges that impede basic processes in facilitating extension services in
Nigeria;
4. explain basic concepts in social analysis extension; and 5. discuss theories and principles
of extension.

Education 77 New
Course Contents
Processes involved in facilitating extension. Programme planning, management, supervision
and evaluation. Tools used for facilitating extension. Resources and personnel employed for
extension programmes. The extension agent and his educational endeavours. Challenges
affecting the basic processes in extension. The Nigerian experience and how to move forward.
Social analysis extension. Theories and principles of extension. Extension personnel and
creation of conducive working environment. Extension agents and social change.
EAE 441: Cooperative Economics (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the meaning of cooperative economics;
2. distinguish between cooperative federalism and cooperative individualism; and
3. highlight the roles of cooperatives in economic development of Nigeria.
Course Contents
Socialist economics, cooperative studies and political economy which are instrumental in
proper management of cooperative societies. The concept of cooperative economics,
cooperative federalism and cooperative individualism, cooperative macroeconomics. The role
of cooperative studies in the economic development of a nation.
EAE 442: Issues in Nigerian Cooperatives (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. enumerate and discuss the concepts, components and processes guiding Cooperatives in
Nigeria;
2. identify the challenges facing Cooperatives in Nigeria and suggest solutions to the
problems; and
3. explore the gender dimensions inherent in the operations and management of Nigerian
Cooperative.
Course Contents
Concepts, components and processes in Nigeria Cooperatives. Farmer perception, rural
producers, microfinance, product marketing, Fadama, institutional co-operatives,
management of co-operatives, and product financing. Problems of Cooperatives as well as
gender issues in the operation and management of Cooperatives in Nigeria.
EAE 451: Women Achievement and Career Motivation (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain some basic concepts of career, career motivation, extrinsic and intrinsic
motivational factors;
2. select and outline a theory of career motivation with applicable principles to the Nigerian
situation;
3. analyse recorded case studies or collect material and write up a relevant case study;

Education 78 New
4. examine the necessity and role of women in politics and other areas for national
development;
5. assess the achievement of women in business, teaching, civil service. politics and other
professions in Nigeria with some examples; and
6. discuss the challenges and overcoming strategies to encourage greater female
participation in education and politics.
Course Contents
Basic concepts of career, and the nature, theories and assessment of career motivation:
extrinsic and intrinsic factors in relation to achievements made by women. The stereotyping
and marginalization of women and career choices, challenges/ constraints. Presentation of life
stories and performances of female teachers, writers, civil servants, bankers, medical doctors,
engineers. The role and participation of women in politics, business, aviation. Profile of selected
prominent women in politics, in other spheres and their contributions for closer motivational
study .Discussion of case studies. Lessons and implications.
EAE 452: Intervention and Evaluation in Women Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, student should be able to:
1. state the importance and necessity of situational analysis as guide to intervention;
2. describe the tools and the steps used for situational analysis;
3. plan a situational analysis and intervention for the empowerment of women in a rural
community;
4. explain the importance of evaluation as part of an intervention project;
5. differentiate between qualitative and quantitative analysis of data obtained from study
of intervention project in women education;
6. list with justification the digital skills that students may use for their evaluations; and
7. identify the challenges that students/workers may encounter carrying out intervention
and evaluations in women education.
Course Contents
The importance of research, the use of situational analysis for planned, targeted interventions
followed by evaluations in women education. Discussion of concepts and of the tools for step
by step investigation for situational analysis, interventions and evaluations. Qualitative and
quantitative analysis. Construction of instruments for evaluation. Actual reports for review.
Practical online or telephone interview of an NGO, government or IDP group that carried out
the project.
EAE 461: Personnel Management and Industrial Relations (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. define personnel management;
2. identify how to enhance personnel capacity and establish the relationship between
motivation and training to job satisfaction, staff output and staff turnover;
3. discuss manpower planning, recruitment and training strategies and explain methods of
administration of personnel’s promotions, incentives, commendations and awards;
4. discuss the concepts of industrial relations, operation, management and incorporation;

Education 79 New
5. identify essential soft skills and social capital required to foster good industrial relations
among stakeholders in industry;
6. highlight the strategies and principles of industry public relation; and
7. explain the roles of marketers, agents and sales representatives in industrial relations.
Course Contents
Concepts of organizational management in relation to personnel and capacity. Principles,
strategies, practices and specific techniques ofpersonnel management within the context of
manpower planning, recruitment and training of personnel, personnel welfare and
development, administration of promotion, incentives, commendations and awards. Concepts
of industrial relations, operation, management and incorporation. The development and
utilization of soft skills and social capital to foster good industrial relations among stakeholders.
Processes and guidelines for the recruitment and engagement of marketers, agents,
distributors and sales representatives, public relation principles and strategies.
EAE 462: Labour Studies, Collective Bargaining and the History of the Nigerian Labour Movement (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. define trade and labour unions;
2. describe labour laws and highlight their relevance to industrial harmony;
3. identify the types and the causes of grievances in industry; 4. mention how to manage
conflicts in industry;
5. highlights steps to resolving labour disharmony in industry.
6. discuss the establishment of NLC and list its mandates ;
7. identify the roles of NLC in industrial matters in Nigeria;
8. enumerate some of the achievements of NLC since inception and highlight its relevance in
the Nigerian Labour space; and
9. explain some of the challenges confronting the labour union suggest ways of addressing
them.
Course Contents
Global capital strategies and trade union responses. Public sector labour laws and collective
bargaining. Labour management. Managing industrial grievances, conflicts and strikes, and
their effects on industrial productivities. Conflict resolution steps and strategies in the
workplace.An overview of the antecedents and activities of labour unions in Nigeria.The history
and politics of the Nigeria Labour Congress (NLC) in Nigeria, its mandates, evolution, modus
operandi, and role in industrial matters. The achievements, challenges and relevance of NLC
in Nigeria.
EAE 471: Economics of Distance Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the relationship between education and economic growth;
2. describe the concept of human capital formation and development;
3. highlight indices of human resources development and social and political indicators; and

Education 80 New
4. discuss the financing of distance education and the impact on quality and effectiveness
of Distance Education.
Course Contents
Analysis of cost of distance education and its match with returns in the short and long terms.
Distance education and economic growth, human-capital as well as the indices of human
resources development. The context of the classical school of thought, the concept of capital
formation in relation to distance education and economic growth. Income and literacy. Social
and political indicators. Production functions and quality of labour. Management, financing,
clientele and the resultant impact on the costing and effectiveness of distance education
programmes.
EAE 472: Management of Distance Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. discuss the concept of management and highlight the core rationales, assumptions and
general principles of programme management;
2. relate the general principles of management to the management of distance Education
and describe various approaches to managing distance education programmes;
3. outline the importance of African values in the context of managing distance Education
facilities and discuss ways of implementing these values;
4. discuss the different motivational strategies available to the manager of a distance
Education programme and the importance of motivating workers, facilitators,
practitioners and learners in distance education programmes;
5. discuss the scope, skills and characteristics of personnel management in distance
education and highlight the role of the personnel manager in a distance education
institution;
6. explain the status of public funding of distance education in Nigeria and articulate the
financial management accountability requirements;
7. highlight the role of a manager in financial management of distance education and
explain the budget preparation process; and
8. outline innovative ways of raising funds for distance education.
Course Contents
Basic concepts of management in relation to open and distance education. Exploration of
various approaches to managing distance education programmes. Importance of African
values in the context of managing distance education resources- personnel, facilities and
finance, and the ways of implementing these values.Adaptations of management concepts and
practices into the running of distance education programmes. Basic leadership skills relevant
to distance education practicee and the principles of participation and facilitation of
learning.Maintaining a satisfying work force in the management of distance education. The
concept of personnel management within the context of its growth and history, scope, nature
and characteristics, roles, features, skills and types. Principles and approaches to personnel
management as well as policies of personnel management. How funds earmarked for distance
education can be managed for sustainable output. The concepts of financial management and
budgeting, financial management accountability requirements, roles of a manager in financial
management of distance education, budgeting functions and preparation processes, innovative
and alternative ways of raising funds, as well as optimization of the use of financial resources.

Education 81 New
EAE 481: Supervision and Change in Adult Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. describe different styles of supervision;
2. select and justify preferred styles of supervision;
3. discuss how to introduce change ideas to supervisors from below as opposed to change
ideas being introduced above from management; and
4. suggest ways to test acceptability of change.

Course Contents
Concept of supervision, styles of supervision, autocratic/close style, consultancy, general
supervision, attitudes of supervisors in both styles. Effects of consultative supervision,
practicing consultative/general supervision, supervisors’ role in introducing change in adult
education supervisory approaches to introducing change. Introducing change from below:
selling ideas to superiors.
EAE 482: Innovations in Adult Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. enumerate new and emerging practices in Adult Education locally and internationally;
2. discuss characteristics of innovation;
3. factors that enhance and inhibit adoption in Nigeria of new and emerging practices
4. discuss how the Adult Educator can facilitate adoption of new changes in the system; and
5. suggest and justify innovations in practice and tools that can be of benefit in Adult
Education.
Course Contents
New and emerging practices in adult education. Characteristics of innovation. The role of the
adult educator, especially the administrator, in facilitating the adoption of new changes using
s top-down approach into the system. Factors that enhance and prevent the processes of
innovation adoption. Risks of innovations to the innovator, to the consumers of innovations.
In depth study of any recent innovation in the form of practice, tool used in adult education.
