EAE 101: Introduction to Adult Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. give the meaning and scope of adult education;
2. discuss the significance of the study of adult-education;
3. identify challenges facing adult education practice in Nigeria; and
4. discuss the career opportunities for adult education graduates.
Course Contents
Concepts of adulthood: Education and adult education. Scope and significance of adult
education. The neglect of adults in the scheme of formal education in developing countries.
The role of adult education and its goals and activities. The challenges facing adult education
practice in Nigeria. Career opportunities for adult educators in Nigeria.
EAE 102: Adult Education and Development (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes

Education 45 New
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. explain the link between education and nation building;
2. express the knowledge of certain education theories guiding national development and
education;
3. provide diverse explanations of social change and development;
4. identify needed social changes in the community and their challenges;
5. state the role of adult education in promoting social change; and
6. discuss the role of university adult education in national development;
Course Contents
Education of adults and national development. Concept of development and its relation to
education. Theories of development in the context of nation states/factors affecting
developing societies. Theories of social change and social development. Types, approaches
and management of change as well as constraints to social change. Role of adult education
in promoting social change. Social policies with focus on Nigeria. University adult education in
developing countries with particular focus on Nigeria.
EAE 111: Literacy and Vocational Skills for Development (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. explain the difference between the production of vowel and consonant sounds;
2. list many phonological features of language (mother tongue & English) with examples of
effect on communication;
3. use and critique certain features in samples of oral communication;
4. identify appropriate techniques for sounding new words; determining meaning of words
and others;
5. use techniques to make out correct features of a language in an oral or written passage;
and
6. create materials for group to practice using the techniques.
Course Contents
The necessity, importance and currency of literacy in various vocational and technological
endeavours. Generation of knowledge of various job skills, career training, and trades that
are based on manual and semi/skilled labour. Different approaches to literacy and vocational
and technological skills. The importance and contribution of vocational skills. Relevance in
Nigerian context for individual, overall national development, employment and entrepreneurial
value of the learner.
EAE 112: Oracy and Linguistic Literacy in English (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the student should be able to:
1. explain the difference between the production of vowel and consonant sounds;
2. list many phonological features of language (mother tongue & English) with examples of
effect on communication;
3. use and critique certain features in samples of oral communication;
4. identify appropriate techniques for sounding new words; determining meaning of words
and others;

Education 46 New
5. use techniques to make out correct features of a language in an oral or written passage;
and
6. create materials for group to practice using the techniques.
Course Contents
The importance of phonological features of language in communication and comprehension.
Develops students listening and speaking skills. The ability to perceive and pronounce English
sounds correctly. Types of listening and speaking skills. Practice in the ability to discriminate
and produce vowel and consonant sounds, diphthongs, segmental and supra segmental.
Different classroom techniques used to practice English phonology, grammar and vocabulary
in a new language. Practice with repetition, substitution, look & say, matching techniques
used normally for beginner language learners. Practice in the creation and development of
materials for the purpose.
EAE 121: Introduction to Community Development (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the meaning of community and community development;
2. give reasons why community development is important;
3. list economic, social and cultural factors that affect community well-being and
development; and
4. describe how education can affect community development.
Course Contents
Concept of Community Development. Meaning of community as distinct from group or society;
rural and urban communities. Characteristics and assumptions of community development
programmes and their component projects. Economic, cultural and social factors in
community development in Nigeria Education as a potent force in poverty elimination/wealth
generation in Nigerian communities.
EAE 122: Adult Education and Community Development (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. state the role and importance of adult education in relation to the Nigerian environment
and SDGs;
2. explain the concepts of self-relevance and self-reliance as goals of adult education and how
they can be achieved; and
3. discuss what strategies can be used to conduct successful adult education in Nigeria.
Course Contents
The importance and role of adult education in community development in Nigeria. Challenges
of poverty, location, tradition to education and community development in Nigeria. The
concepts of self-relevance, self-reliance and basic needs approach, relating and adapting the
concepts to Nigerian situation.
EAE 131: Working with Marginal Groups (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes

Education 47 New
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. identify various marginalised groups and their educational needs;
2. describe the principles and techniques of working with marginalised groups;
3. discuss the challenges affecting the education of marginalised groups in Nigeria;
4. state effective ways of organising and addressing the challenges of marginalised groups;
and
5. explain the importance of inclusion of the marginalised group for sustainable
development.
Course Contents
The concept of marginalised groups in society such as women, orphans, the poor, the sick,
people living with HIV and AIDS, the handicapped, ethnic minorities and others. Principles
and strategies for working with marginalised groups.The organisation of programmes for
marginalised groups – government and private efforts. National policy and programmes for
marginalised groups. Challenges in addressing the needs of marginalised groups.Inclusiveness
and sustainability.
EAE 132: Critical Pedagogy (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain certain methods of helping adults learn;
2. discuss the roles of Malcolm Knowles and Paulo Freire in shaping adult education
instruction;
3. discuss Nigeria’s national policy on education provisions on adult education instruction;
and
4. discuss the meaning, scope and significance of extension education.
Course Contents
The methods of helping adults learn. Introduction of the teacher not as a depositor of
knowledge(so-called banking concept) nor learners as recipients. Paulo Freire and
conscientization. Malcolm Knowles and andragogy. National policy on education and adult
instructional strategies and techniques. Principles of adult learning in Nigeria. Introduction to
the meaning, scope and significance of extension education.
EAE 141: Historical Perspectives of Cooperative in Nigeria (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. give an historical account of cooperative movement in Nigeria before and after
independence;
2. highlight the factors that contributed to the growth and development of cooperative
societies in different sectors of the society; and
3. describe the transformative process of the Cooperative from the traditional to the modern
form.
Course Contents
The predisposing factors leading to the emergence of cooperative movement in Nigeria. The
origins of cooperative movement in Nigeria in pre-independence and post-Independence era.
The nature and forms of the cooperative movement and the growth and developmental

Education 48 New
processes. Provision of an adequate map of the relevant timelines regarding the beginning of
various cooperative ventures in diverse fields such as housing, transportation, institutions,
and agriculture such as Fadama.
EAE 142: Introduction to Philosophy of Cooperatives and Cooperative Management (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. discuss the concept of cooperatives and describe the basis and basic principles of
cooperative;
2. identify the types and forms of cooperatives in Nigeria and state the advantages of
cooperative;
3. highlight the distinction between cooperatives and other business enterprise;
4. explain the concept of cooperative management and describe cooperative governance;
and
5. enumerate the challenges facing cooperatives in Nigeria.
Course Contents
The importance, purpose and basis of co-operatives. Principles of cooperatives; Governance
and management of cooperatives. The concept of the cooperative, its advantages, history,
types and forms in Nigeria. Models of co-operative management. The distinction between
cooperatives and other forms of business.
EAE 151 Introduction to Gender Studies (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. outline the scope of gender studies and basic concepts;
2. trace historical differentiation of male and female roles;
3. explain the multidisciplinary nature of women’s affairs;
4. describe the normal, traditional roles reserved for women in Nigerian society;
5. explain the global and local forces for change; and
6. state the problems of changing the normative status of women and suggest solutions.
Course Contents
Interdisciplinary nature and scope of gender studies; Distinction between gender and sex;
Analyses and construction of male and female roles historically and from perspective of
various disciplines; The traditional types of roles reserved for women in the family, in other
societal institutions; Factors and indices of changing economic, social and political roles; The
necessity for change and constraints; Global trends and areas of particular interest in
developed and developing countries.
EAE 152: Government Policies and Development of Women (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the importance of government articulated policy for women development;
2. identify the landmark policy statements and instruments and underlying global influences
if any;

Education 49 New
3. analyse the focus and targets of policies;
4. assess extent and success of implementation and sustainability;
5. trace historically the focal points of women education in response to growing demands;
6. identify the socio-cultural and economic factors placing constraints on women education
in the Nigerian environment;
7. summarise and assess individual, private and government interventions to equalize
women educational opportunities; and
8. suggest further action to be taken in Nigeria to meet 2030 targets.
Course Contents
The role, genesis and importance of policy in women development, traditional education and
objectives. Expanded demands and tackling the socio-cultural and economic factors that
create disadvantages in women education. Projects, strategies and efforts being made to
equalize educational and other opportunities. Targets of policies and laws in women
development. Implementation and impact of various policies and legislations put in place by
government to promote women interests – rights, equality, empowerment and to narrow
gender disparity in the country global influences and sustainability. Assessment against
achievement of SDGs and 2030 target.
EAE 161: Introduction to Industrial Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students are expected to:
1. identify various occupations and careers in industry;
2. explain key terms in the world of work;
3. discuss the concepts of industry, education, and industrial education;
4. mention different types of industry and nature of their production; and
5. describe forms of industrial education essential to enhance workers’ skills, competence
and productivity.
Course Contents
Specialized skills related to a variety of occupations and careers in the society. Key terms
relating to the world of work are discussed. Concepts of industry, education, and industrial
education. Different types of industry and nature of their production as well as different forms
of industrial education necessary for the enhancement of workers’ skills, competences and
productivity.
EAE 162: Introduction to Personnel Development and Administration (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students are expected to:
1. explain personnel development and highlight importance of personnel training;
2. discuss workers’ training needs, in-service training, training on the job;
3. highlight the steps to mentoring of workers in an industry;
4. describe how targets are set and met in an industry;
5. explain personnel administration and identify principles, policies, and practices in
personnel administration;
6. describe methods of job design in industry; and

Education 50 New
7. highlight techniques of staff recruitment, selection and placement in industry; and identify
the yardsticks used for workers’ promotion.
Course Contents
Origin and development of personnel administration. The principles, policies and practices in
personnel administration and their implications for industries. Principles and methods applied
to the problems of (a) job design (b) recruitment (c) promotion (d) selection (e) placement
and (f) evaluation of personnel. How workers in an organization can assist to grow and
manage for productivity. Concept of personnel development. Personnel training. Assessing
and meeting workers’ training needs. In-service training, training on the job, mentoring of
workers, job description and assignment of duties. Setting and meeting targets of production
and delivery.
EAE 171: History of Distance Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. give a historical background of open and distance education/learning in Nigeria;
2. examine the different models of distance learning in Nigeria;
3. highlight the roles of mass media in the development of open and distance education in
Nigeria;
4. identify the distinction between distance education and other terminologies with distance
education;
5. give examples of some correspondence institute;
6. explain the roles of information and communication technology in the development of
open and distance learning in Nigeria;
7. explain the role of national open university of Nigeria (noun) in the promotion of distance
education in Nigeria; and
8. give an overview of the work study programme of National Open University in Nigeria.
Course Contents
The origins, growth and development of distance education/learning in Nigeria; Different
models of distance education in Nigeria; Roles of mass media, information and communication
technology in the development of open and distance education in Nigeria. Distinction between
distance education and other terminologies used interchangeably with distance education.
Case study of some early correspondence institutes. Teaching methods and technology of
remote instructional delivery. An examination of the work study programme of the National
Open University in Nigeria.
EAE 172: Open Learning System and Learning in Non-school Environment (2
Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. define and discuss the meaning, concept and objectives of Open Learning;
2. highlight the features of LMS, explain the concept of learning management system (LMS)
and its use in Open Learning;
3. discuss the meaning and types of open access literature as well as its relevance to Open
Learning;

Education 51 New
4. enumerate the different techniques used in Open Learning and identify the users and
beneficiaries;
5. identify nature and types of non-school environment in Nigeria;
6. discuss the forms and contents of learning in non-school environment;
7. suggest methods for improvisation and deployment of human and material resources for
learning in non-school environment; and
8. enumerate factors inhibiting learning in non-school environment.
Course Contents
Concepts and models of Open Learning, learning management system (LMS) as well as the
features, objectives, techniques, users and beneficiaries of Open Learning; Opportunities that
Open Learning provides for adult learning. The types of media that are available for, and the
challenges that impact on Open Learning. Examination of open access literature and its
relevance to Open Learning. Concepts of learning in non-school environment. Objectives,
techniques and beneficiaries of learning in non-school environment; Focus on opportunities
and provisions offered by non-school environment for adult learning. Open Learning that
teachers and other social service staff such as doctors, nurses, social workers, and other
professionals in different work settings can (and must) access.
EAE 201: Psychology of Adult Learning (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students are expected to:
1. distinguish the circumstances of adult learners from other learners;
2. explain the various learning theories and their application to adult learning; and
3. discuss the aging process and its impact on adult learners.
Course Contents
Concept of adulthood and adult development stages. The adult learner and his characteristics.
Distinctions between adult learners and children in school. Adult learning theories.
stimulusresponse theories, cognitive and field theories. Principles of adult learning. Adult
learning environment. Aging and learning, motivation, and learning styles in adult education.
Challenges faced by adult learners in adult education.
EAE 203: Historical Development of Adult Education in Nigeria and Elsewhere (2
Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students are expected to:
1. demonstrate knowledge of the evolution of adult education as a distinct field of study;
2. discuss the evolution of adult education in Nigeria from pre-colonial times to date;
3. identify and describe different methods and techniques of comparing adult education
systems in different climes;
4. compare the development of adult education in developing and developed countries; and
5. highlight the contributions of NGOs, professional bodies and international development
partners in the development of adult education in Nigeria.
Course Contents
The origin of the field of adult education as a distinct field of study. Traditional forms of adult
education. Development of adult education globally and in Nigeria during the pre-colonial,
colonial and post-colonial periods. Origins of adult education institutions such as town
meetings, agricultural society, workers associations, mechanic institutes, public libraries,
extramural studies, university extension movement and Sunday schools. Concepts, methods
and techniques of comparing adult education in different systems. Adult education systems
comparison in the context of time and space; Adult education in the developed and developing
countries, between rural and urban settings in the same country, and in the past and present.
National policies and practices on adult education. Comparison of adult education in Nigeria
with elsewhere. Influence of external bodies in the development of adult education such as
United Nations agencies - UNICEF, UNDP; professional bodies such as NNCAE, private groups
and others.
EAE 204: Sociology of Adult Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students are expected to:
1. explain various sociological concepts in relation to adult education;
2. describe certain sociological theories and their effect on adult education;

Education 54 New
3. relate the role of adult education to the promotion of social change;
4. describe pattern and arrangements of dynamic component parts within the society;
5. state the consequent influences of belonging to society on behaviour, status and personal
independence; and
6. discuss possible management strategies to promote human development and
independence.
Course Content
The concepts of sociology, man and society in relation to adult education. Insights into
patterned social arrangements which form the society as a whole, largely determine the status
and actions of individuals, groups and institutions socialized into that structure. Social
institutions and their impact on adult education; Concept of social transformation and factors
promoting social transformation; Sociological theories and their implications in adult
education; Social structures, social stratification and mobility, their effects on adults; Adult
learning centers.
EAE 206: Introduction to Non-Formal Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students are expected to:
1. explain the concept of non-formal education in relation to other education modes;
2. situate traditional adult education within the context of non-formal education;
3. identify various non-formal learning Centre’s in Nigeria; and
4. discuss the problems of non-formal learning centres and suggest possible solutions.
Course Contents
Concepts of formal, informal and non-formal education. Relationship between non-formal and
adult education. Non-formal education in Nigeria both in the past and in contemporary society.
Principles and practices of non-formal education. Similarities and differences between
nonformal education, formal and informal education. Typical non-formal learning centres in
Nigeria: roadside mechanic workshops, tailoring institutes, computer literacy centres,
women/youths skills acquisition and other centres. Challenges and improvement of non-
formal education in Nigeria.

EAE 211: Theories of Andragogy Applied to Literacy Learning (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. state problems adults experience in learning new things, skills, information especially
language;
2. compare and contrast adults and children’s learning patterns;
3. describe some ways of motivating adult learners;
4. name and summarise one learning theory and its principles;
5. explain an eclectic learning approach;
6. show how some learning principles can be applied to vocational skill learning; language
learning; socio-emotional skill learning; and
7. identify some cognitive skills and what learning principles can be used to promote them.
Course Contents
The nature, necessity and challenges of adults’ learning of a new language for speaking,
reading and writing purposes. Review of differences between children and adult learning.

Education 55 New
Selected theories specifically for adult learning example Knowles Theory of Andragogy, and
cognitive learning theory. The principles and their application to vocational, language,
cognitive and socio-emotional skills learning generally, and particularly in the Nigerian post
covid-19 situation. Conditions for application, singly or in an eclectic manner.
EAE 212: Literacy Education and Social Change (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the nature of social change;
2. mention factors that can bring about social change;
3. compare planned and unplanned social change;
4. show in what ways literacy education can bring about beneficial social change;
5. state differences of positive social change in urban and rural areas of Nigeria;
6. discuss the meaning of and necessity for sustainable development; and
7. discuss what environmental issues are suitable for enlightenment campaign.
Course Contents
Concept of social change. The link between literacy and social change. Needs assessment for
change targets. Factors that engender social change -natural, technological innovations,
demographic, economic, ideas and others. Change through planned literacy and policy targets
advocating for sustainable inclusive development for marginalised adult groups; Important
issues for mass education and enlightenment – education, health, water, sanitation, child
protection, skill training and microcredits to achieve sustainable development. How social
order of society in rural and urban Nigerian environments may be altered for social progress,
economic wellbeing and political awareness. Specific problems and issues of the environment
relevant to Nigeria and targeted by literacy education; Disposal of plastics and other wastes,
floods, sanitation, pollution and other problems. Strategies for handling the problems.
Constraints and analyses.
EAE 221: Socio-Cultural Features of Community Development (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. describe characteristics and stages of social movements;
2. discuss socio-cultural aspects of community life and importance to the well-being of the
community;
3. explain how socio-cultural aspects of life may condition attitudes and personality of
individuals in the community;
4. explain the existing class distinction in education;
5. discuss the influence of location, cost, et as factors in class distinction in education; private
and public education; and
6. give reasons and appreciate how education is a force for desired social change.
Course Contents
Education and relationship with social class structure: origins and maintenance. The scope,
characteristics and stages of social movements and social class. Social and cultural features
of community life - communication, relationships, outlook on life. Socio-cultural determinants
of personality adjustment and attitudes towards social change and community development.
Education and social change. Location, cost, curriculum as factors in provision of the upper

Education 56 New
class as contrasted with mass education. Class distinction in education and the link to private
and public education. Contingent issues.
EAE 222: Comparative Studies in Community Development (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. state the usefulness of and possible lessons from engaging in comparative assessment of
developing communities;
2. select and justify the use of participatory or integrated approach of community
development in Nigeria;
3. describe simple methods and techniques to use in comparative studies of communities’
development;
4. discuss the pros and cons of using technological devices in the study of community
development in Nigeria;
5. explain what lessons can be learnt by a student participating in the planning and study
of community development; and
6. describe the composition of the group and list parameters to use in a comparative study
of community development.
Course Contents
Overview of community structure. The nature and importance of community development
studies. Concepts, models- community based, integrated and participatory approach.
Parameters for development including sustainability. Methods and techniques of comparing
community development in different countries and different locations. Use of Technology.
Lessons for community development in the Nigerian context.
EAE 231: Learning in Non-School Environment (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. situate the scope and significance of open learning to be a veritable educational tool outside
the conventional schooling;
2. identify advantages and challenges associated with open schooling;
3. describe how Nigeria can optimise the use of open schooling; and
4. discuss issues and challenges associated with learning in non-school settings.
Course Contents
Concepts of open learning. Objectives, techniques and strategies of open learning. Target
beneficiaries of open learning. Rationale for open learning. Tools of open and distance
learning. Advantages and challenges of open learning. Discussion of different cases of open
schools around the globe, the Indian National Open School, the National Open University of
the UK, National Open University of Nigeria and others. Learning in the community. Challenges
of learning in non-school settings.
EAE 232: Political Economy of Extension (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:

Education 57 New
1. demonstrate ability to bring out how economic theories and methods can impact on
extension work in the community;
2. discuss the theories and principles of extension; and
3. highlight the benefits extension work to productivity and the economy in Nigeria.
Course Contents
Impact of economic theories. Methods and implementation of public policy on extension work.
Theories and principles of extension. Education and social change. Innovation and diffusion
of innovations. Extension organisation and management. The extension worker and tools for
extension such as the mass media. Benefits of extension work to productivity and the
economy. Political economy of extension in Nigeria. Introduction to agricultural education and
extension. The agricultural value chain and modern agriculture. Production techniques.
EAE 241: Bye laws and Registration (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. discuss how cooperative bye laws are drafted;
2. highlight the essential components of cooperative bye laws;
3. describe the steps involved in the registration of cooperative societies;
4. explain government regulations governing cooperative societies; and
5. discuss any problems encountered in operating the law and suggest solutions.
Course Contents
The importance of codified rules, regulations and laws for the governance and smooth running
or organisations. The drafting of co-operative bylaws. Essential components of cooperatives
and their integration. Steps and processes of registration of co-operative societies, and
government regulations governing co-operative societies. Operational challenges and
problems. Coping solutions.
EAE 242: Cooperatives and National Development (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the roles of cooperative societies to national development;
2. describe the nature, forms and structures of cooperative financial institutions in Nigeria;
3. discuss the forms and structure of Cooperatives in Nigeria and the impact on
socioeconomic development; and
4. outline the ways cooperative ventures have assisted in tackling the problems of
unemployment in Nigeria.
Course Contents
Different perspectives on development. Exploration of areas through which various
stakeholders have used Cooperatives in the attempt to achieve different developmental goals
and contribute to national development particularly at the rural level.The role of Cooperatives,
finance institutions in reducing unemployment.Analysis of the role of Cooperatives in national
development.
EAE 251: Women and Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes

Education 58 New
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the necessity and perspective of the education of girls and women as a human
right;
2. state the benefits of education generally and women education in particular as the means
to change and development;
3. discuss the identified problems, proffered solutions and suggest more solutions;
4. state the importance of education of women for development and to the individual;
5. discuss the choices of educational type and paths available to women and the factors
compelling such choices; and
6. argue convincingly about freedom to choose educational path, removal of some of the
constraints and challenges.
Course Contents
Social and environmental needs for change and development of women and other vulnerable
groups.Overview of education as a primary means to change and development.Examination
of gender equality in education - importance of education to women, choice of type and
educational path. Women access to education, education as a foundation to a fulfilling adult
life and role. Constraints and challenges to women education. The search for
alternative/expanded access to education.The UN perspective of girls’ and women’s education
in overall education and development effort of a nation.
EAE 252: Reproductive Health of Women and Environment (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. state the meaning of reproductive health of women and the impact of the environment
on health;
2. list the infections and diseases endemic in the environment and preventive measures to
take to maintain positive reproductive health;
3. suggest improvement strategies for preventing reproductive diseases of women in the
neighbourhood;
4. explain the link between female reproductive health and development;
5. show how female reproductive health has an impact on family health;
6. argue in favour of the need for widespread information on aspects of female reproductive
health issues to be disseminated to all sectors of the community; and
7. analyse the influence of external interest on female reproductive health issues especially
HIV Aids on the Nigerian situation.
Course Contents
Relationship of Women’s reproductive health issues to development globally and for the
nation. Basic concepts of reproductive health, sex, the female organ and infections in relation
to their immediate environment. Diseases and conditions that affect the female reproductive
system including symptoms, diagnosis, treatment and prevention of women’s reproductive
health issues. Effect on reproduction of children and family health. Important lessons from
HIV Aids. Information and resources concerning women’s reproductive health.
EAE 261: Management of Small Scale Industries (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students are expected to:
1. identify strategies for establishing and sustaining small scale entrepreneurial industries;

Education 59 New
2. explain the key terms in business management such as bookkeeping, banking, stock
taking, personnel management, credit facilities, marketing, customer relations;
3. identify the need for business registration and state the roles of CAC in business
registration and management in Nigeria
4. discuss basic management principles and strategies suitable for enhancing personnel
and industrial operational efficiency and effectiveness
5. highlight the importance of branding and trademark/secrets to the prospects of a
business enterprise; and
6. apply SWOT analysis as a strategic planning technique for healthy business competition.
Course Contents
Basic concepts of the operation and eligibility for running and enrolling in small scale industry,
as well as the organization and management. Basic management principles and strategies
directed at improving efficiency and effectiveness of personnel, resource utilization and
output. The processes for registration of business enterprise and premises with the Ministry
of Commerce and Trades. Role of Corporate Affairs Commission (CAC) in business registration
and management. Strategies for sustaining small scale entrepreneurial industries covering
book keeping, banking, stock taking, personnel management, credit facilities, marketing,
customer relations, branding and re-branding, maintaining trade secrets and confidentiality.
Application of SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats) analysis as a strategic
planning technique for healthy business competition.
EAE 262: Workers Education, Skills and Scaling in Labour (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students are expected to:
1. discuss the concept of work and identify factors that promote efficiency at work;
2. explain the essence of workers skills and competence updating and upgrading;
3. discuss the relevance of continuous professional education, and self-directed learning to
workers education and learning.
4. explain the concept of production and discuss the processes for acquiring and transmitting
knowledge, skills and attitudes to improve efficiency and effectiveness
5. identify factors that enhance production of quality goods and services and highlight the
strategies for ensuring that production meets the needs of the customers; and
6. enumerate the marketing skills required in selling goods and services.
Course Contents
The concept of work. Factors promoting efficiency at work. Work life experiences. Workers
training and on-the-job skills acquisition. Skills and competence upgrading. Continuous
professional education (CPE).Self-directed learning and the importance of continuing
education and learning.The roles of prior learning assessments and recognition, self-reflective
practices, self-directed learning, and informal learning inn the continuing professional
development of service staff and other professionals. Globalization, speedy changes in
information communication technologies, diseases without borders and their impact on social
services, workers welfare, workers’ productivity and the polity. Basic concepts of accuracy and
precision application to endowed skills in production. Processes for acquiring and transmitting
knowledge, skills and attitudes to improve efficiency and effectiveness.Strategies to identify
and meet the customers’ needs, balancing demand and supply and fixing prices on goods and
services. Factors that enhance the production of quality goods and services.
EAE 271: Instructional Technology in Distance Education (2 Units C: LH 30)

Education 60 New
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the concept of instructional technology, teaching aids and techniques and relate
this to the concept of instructional system design (ISD);
2. enumerate the key elements of instructional design in distance education and discuss the
fundamental principles of human learning that form the basis of instructional design in
distance education;
3. itemise and explain major factors to be considered in instructional design in distance
education; and
4. explain the effect of contextual factors such as power and politics on the deployment of
technology in instructional design.
Course Contents
Basic concepts of instructional technology, teaching aids and techniques in relation to distance
education as well as instructional system design and its elements. The fundamental principles
of human learning that form the basis of instructional design in distance education. The
interface of language, culture and technology, and the effect of contextual factors such as
power and politics on the deployment of technology in instructional design in Distance
Education.
EAE 272: Programme Monitoring and Evaluation in Distance Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the concept of monitoring and evaluation of distance education;
2. differentiate between monitoring and evaluation of distance education;
3. highlight the steps involved in carrying out monitoring and evaluation of distance
education;
4. discuss the essential components of evaluation report and enumerate the different phases
of evaluation; and
5. describe different evaluation models and utilize them to design an evaluation plan for
distance education.
Course Contents
Basic concepts of programme monitoring and evaluation of distance education
programmes.The importance of programme monitoring and evaluation.What is evaluated,
strategies, methods and frameworks of monitoring and evaluation in relation to the
effectiveness of knowledge impacting technique. Differentiation of monitoring and evaluation
of Distance Education. The steps involved in carrying out monitoring and evaluation of
Distance Education. Essential components of evaluation report. Types, phases and models of
evaluation in Distance Education.
EAE 281: Financing Adult Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the rationale for cost analyses in educational planning;
2. analyse the state of expenses at local, state and federal levels;

Education 61 New
3. enumerate the sources of adult education funding; and
4. prepare and present budgets, simple accounts and financial statements.
Course Contents
Nature and elements in cost classification and behavior. Rationale for cost analysis in adult
educational planning. Analysis of adult education expenses at Local, State, and Federal levels.
Financing Adult Education including generation and conservation of resources through
budgeting, budgetary control and planning. Principles of double entry book-keeping,
preparation and presentation of simple final accounts and financial statements. Challenges of
financial adult education in Nigeria.
EAE 282: Administration of Adult Education: Theory and Practice (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course students should be able to:
1. explain concepts of administration, management, adult education administration;
2. outline management/administration theories;
3. describe administrative functions and how they influence successful organization of adult
education in Nigeria; and
4. identify problems of adult education practice in Nigeria and suggest solutions.
Course Contents
Concepts of administration, management, adult education and adult education administration.
Concept of theory and its importance to the administrators and/or programme organizers.
Exploration of various management/administration theories: problems and prospects. The
practice of adult education in Nigeria. Administrative functions/processes and their influence
on the successful organization and provision of various adult education functions in Nigeria.
EAE 301: Funding and Management of Adult Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students are expected to:
1. discuss the various sources of funding adult education programmes;
2. identify practical ways in which adult education is financed in Nigeria; and
3. highlight challenges in the funding and management of adult education in Nigeria.

Education 64 New
Course Contents
Issues in the financing of adult and non-formal education.Sources of funds from government,
development partners, NGOs, CBOs, corporate bodies and individuals.Alternative sources of
funding adult education.Funding adult education in Nigeria.Theories and principles of adult
education management.Adult education personnel.Challenges in the funding and
management of adult education in Nigeria.
EAE 302: Teaching Principles and Practice in Adult Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students are expected to:
1. acquaint themselves with the unique characteristics of adult learners;
2. identify the major approaches and principles involved in helping adults learn; and
3. discuss specific techniques that are suitable for different sets of adult learners.
Course Contents
Issues pertaining to the adult learner.Malcolm Knowles and the concept of Andragogy. Major
approaches/principles of adult learning: group learning situations, group discussion, T-groups,
Buzz groups, seminars, conferences, projective and participatory approaches. Individual and
group presentations, demonstrations, meetings and meeting methods, improving listening,
expressive and reading skills, and self-assessment of learning progress.
EAE 303: Comparative Adult Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students are expected to:
1. explain the key concepts and techniques in comparative adult education;
2. identify adult education systems in different countries; and
3. describe how adult education in Nigeria differs from some other countries.
Course Contents
Concepts, methods and techniques of comparing adult education in different systems. Adult
education systems comparison in the context of time and space. Adult education in the
developed and developing countries. Adult education between rural and urban settings in the
same country, and in the past and the present. National policies and practices on adult
education. Comparison of adult education in Nigeria with elsewhere.
EAE 311: Post Literacy and Resources in Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. define post literacy education;
2. state strategies to use to sustain literacy among the recently literate in the community;
3. list resources and state their usefulness in literacy education;
4. discuss availability and acquisition;
5. improvise an instructional material;
6. suggest both preventive and remedial strategies for maintenance of literacy; and
7. practise with some of the technological resource materials.
Course Contents

Education 65 New
Importance, nature and practice of post literacy education. Strategies, principles and
provisions for sustaining literacy among recently literate or neo-literate adults and
communities. Such literacy sustaining strategies may be similar to the ones provided in
primary education studies. Resources to support literacy education. Availability and utilisation
of teaching resources, learning materials, equipment and aids in literacy education including
books, primers, CCTV, pictures, computer-assisted drills, assistive devices. Improvisation of
resources especially of instructional materials.
EAE 312: Management of Small-Scale Business (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. list small scale businesses in the neighbourhood and describe one;
2. state the importance of small and medium businesses in national economies;
3. link literacy skills to management of small business enterprises;
4. explain the various activities involved in management of small-scale business;
5. describe essential skills and knowledge required for efficient management of small-scale
entrepreneurial outfit;
6. show how social skills and positive personality traits can enhance management and
functioning of small business enterprises;
7. discuss in what ways use of technology and digital skills can help the management and
functioning of small business enterprises; and
8. enumerate some of the challenges and suggest out-of-the-box coping strategies.
Course Contents
The meaning and examples of small scale businesses in state. SMEs as a mainstay of
economies in various countries. Usefulness of literacy for management of small business
enterprise. Simple strategies for sustaining small scale entrepreneurial industries including
book-keeping, banking, stock taking, personnel management, credit facilities, marketing,
customer relations. Socio-psychological skills for successful management of small businesses
– cooperativeness, friendliness, integrity, excellence. Simple digital skills for business contacts,
advertisements, networking, information storage and other skills. Challenges and coping
strategies.
EAE 321: Ecosystem and Community Development (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. give the meaning and nature of ecosystem;
2. distinguish between environmental and community development ecosystems;
3. state the relationship of ecosystem and the community in terms of people’s cultural, social
and economic behaviours;
4. discuss planned beneficial community development based on improved ecosystem; and
5. state some of the challenges of both environmental and community development
ecosystems face and suggest coping strategies.
Course Contents
The meaning and nature of ecosystem. The influence of different types of natural ecosystem
on behaviours, occupations, temperament of community members. Community members
interacting with environmental ecosystem - all the organisms, flora and landscape for mutual
benefit. Community development ecosystem emphasising partnerships, inter-group

Education 66 New
relationships for progress to the exclusion of pollutants. Environmental preservation.
Sustainable community development. Creation of healthy community development
ecosystems, dealing with pollutants including racism, gender and ethnic discrimination. Global
EAE 402: Evaluation of Adult Education Programmes (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. demonstrate knowledge of concepts of evaluation in education;
2. describe types and techniques of evaluation of adult education programmes;
3. identify different aspects of adult education programmes that can be evaluated;
4. list and explain applicability of various instruments to use for evaluation of Adult Education
Programmes;
5. suggest how and apply ICT techniques in evaluative study of Adult Education Programmes
in Nigeria; and
6. demonstrate practically an evaluation of a Nigerian adult education programme/project.
Course Contents
Concepts of evaluation in education. Different aspects of the programmes to be evaluated.
Different evaluation instruments. Goals and purposes of evaluation. General principles and
foci of formative and summative evaluation. Selected types of evaluative studies. Surveys, the
case study, qualitative and quantitative. Evaluation of design programme content materials,
operation, and evaluation of impact. An overview of evaluative instruments suitable for adult
education programmes in Nigeria. Review of Adult education programmes evaluation in
Nigeria.
EAE 403: ICT and Communication Media in Adult Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the meaning of major ICT concepts;
2. describe the significance of ICT in the promotion of teaching and learning adult education;
3. situate the importance of communication media in adult education;
4. identify various mass media tools in contemporary society;
5. identify the advantages and limitations of certain mass media tools in adult education;
and
6. describe mass media personnel and techniques for effective delivery of adult education
programmes.
Course Contents

Education 74 New
Major concepts in ICT. The use of ICT in media and adult education. Tools for storing and
transmitting educational information to adult learners. Mass media tools including print media
(newspapers, magazines, ) and electronic media (radio, television film, internet) and their
applications. Advantages and limitations of those media tools. Production techniques and
system utilization. Mass media personnel. Feedback and evaluation of programmes.
EAE 411: Primer Construction and Research in Adult Literacy (2 Units C : LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. describe different types of primers used in literacy education;
2. state methods, strategies needed to construct and produce a primer;
3. investigate and list what subject matter would be of interest to adults in your
neighbourhood;
4. construct a primer with a group containing specified features;
5. justify the use of technological devices for the construction and production of primer; 6.
discuss the use of a primer for adult instruction; and
7. explain the benefit of research in adult education to primer construction.
Course Contents
Different types of primers. Issue of scarcity of suitable primers. Selection of contents, choice
of approach-whole word, phonology, drill, syllabic. The methods, strategies and principles of
how literacy primer can be constructed and used for adult education purposes. Paucity of
relevant research to feed the primer construction. Group primer construction exercises for
critiquing. Technological devices to harvest and harness materials of interest and relevance
to adult learners. Development and utilization of skills for technical, editorial, collation, binding
and other skills useful for primer construction expertise.
EAE 412: Contemporary Issues in Literacy and Vocational Skills Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. identify some local and contemporary issues in literacy education;
2. state the policy issues in Nigeria and compare with another West African country;
3. explain how literacy and vocational skills are important for community and national
development;
4. show how different communities and governments are tackling these issues;
5. suggest ways that any selected issues can be handled in Nigeria; and
6. discuss how to network and share ideas with other locations and countries for solutions.
Course Contents
Review of the importance of literacy and vocational skills in national, international and
sustainable development. Contemporary, global and local issues in literacy and vocational
skills development. Curriculum content and relevance, training, use of ICT devices and
certification issues. Lack of interest, negative attitudes, scarcity of trained personnel,
standardization of training, facilities and resources. Existing policies and gaps. Issues of
certification -codification, transferability. Career structure, job employment and
commensurate remuneration. Funding, infrastructure, safety, personnel and expected

:

Education 75 New
economic, social, changes in the community. Status in the community. The intervention of
IDPs -UNESCO, ECOWAS. Forward-looking resolution of issues.
EAE 421: Sociology of Development (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students will be able to:
1. explain the meaning of development, human development, societal development;
2. state the factors that bring about change and the progressive nature of development;
3. enumerate the problems of translating policy to implementation in community
development;
4. imagine and suggest ways of planning and effecting development beneficial to Nigerian
communities in future; and
5. compare and contrast factors that affect human and economic development in a
developed and developing country.
Course Contents
The nature and meaning of development. Concept of development of the society in
multidimensional ways. Human and economic development within a dynamic, structured

Education 76 New
society. Factors and forces of change and the way they affect different groups and institutions
within the society. Current conceptual issues, practical development issues.
EAE 422: Needs Analysis and Evaluation of Community Development (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the meaning and usefulness of needs analysis for community development;
2. devise and justify a stepwise plan for needs analysis of a known community;
3. state what areas and targets can be selected for study in a typical Nigerian community;
4. list and describe the tools for evaluating community projects;
5. find and read up for critiquing reported cases of community project; and 6. participate in
group simulation of community project.
Course Contents
The nature, purpose, necessity and structure of community needs analyses as foundation for
planned intervention. Evaluation of intervention development projects. Example of a stepwise
plan and strategy requirements, needs analysis, goals, aspirations resources for community
development. The tools for evaluating community life and projects.Critiquing, simulation or
evaluation of a community project.Application to Nigerian environment.
EAE 431: Adult Education and Integrated Social Development (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. demonstrate the contribution of adult education and enlightenment to the social
development of communities;
2. relate theories of social change to social development of society; and
3. enhance their capacity to use adult education for social development in Nigeria.
Course Contents
Basic concepts of adult education and social development as a result of enlightenment and
education. Theories of social change. Educational reforms and social change. The role of adult
education in improvement of quality of life. Management of social change. The social change
agent. Case studies. Nature, problems and future of social development and adult education
role in Nigeria.
EAE 432: Basic Processes in Facilitating Extension (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the basic processes in facilitating extension;
2. identify the tools and resources that facilitate extension;
3. discuss the challenges that impede basic processes in facilitating extension services in
Nigeria;
4. explain basic concepts in social analysis extension; and 5. discuss theories and principles
of extension.

Education 77 New
Course Contents
Processes involved in facilitating extension. Programme planning, management, supervision
and evaluation. Tools used for facilitating extension. Resources and personnel employed for
extension programmes. The extension agent and his educational endeavours. Challenges
affecting the basic processes in extension. The Nigerian experience and how to move forward.
Social analysis extension. Theories and principles of extension. Extension personnel and
creation of conducive working environment. Extension agents and social change.
EAE 441: Cooperative Economics (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the meaning of cooperative economics;
2. distinguish between cooperative federalism and cooperative individualism; and
3. highlight the roles of cooperatives in economic development of Nigeria.
Course Contents
Socialist economics, cooperative studies and political economy which are instrumental in
proper management of cooperative societies. The concept of cooperative economics,
cooperative federalism and cooperative individualism, cooperative macroeconomics. The role
of cooperative studies in the economic development of a nation.
EAE 442: Issues in Nigerian Cooperatives (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. enumerate and discuss the concepts, components and processes guiding Cooperatives in
Nigeria;
2. identify the challenges facing Cooperatives in Nigeria and suggest solutions to the
problems; and
3. explore the gender dimensions inherent in the operations and management of Nigerian
Cooperative.
Course Contents
Concepts, components and processes in Nigeria Cooperatives. Farmer perception, rural
producers, microfinance, product marketing, Fadama, institutional co-operatives,
management of co-operatives, and product financing. Problems of Cooperatives as well as
gender issues in the operation and management of Cooperatives in Nigeria.
EAE 451: Women Achievement and Career Motivation (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain some basic concepts of career, career motivation, extrinsic and intrinsic
motivational factors;
2. select and outline a theory of career motivation with applicable principles to the Nigerian
situation;
3. analyse recorded case studies or collect material and write up a relevant case study;

Education 78 New
4. examine the necessity and role of women in politics and other areas for national
development;
5. assess the achievement of women in business, teaching, civil service. politics and other
professions in Nigeria with some examples; and
6. discuss the challenges and overcoming strategies to encourage greater female
participation in education and politics.
Course Contents
Basic concepts of career, and the nature, theories and assessment of career motivation:
extrinsic and intrinsic factors in relation to achievements made by women. The stereotyping
and marginalization of women and career choices, challenges/ constraints. Presentation of life
stories and performances of female teachers, writers, civil servants, bankers, medical doctors,
engineers. The role and participation of women in politics, business, aviation. Profile of selected
prominent women in politics, in other spheres and their contributions for closer motivational
study .Discussion of case studies. Lessons and implications.
EAE 452: Intervention and Evaluation in Women Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, student should be able to:
1. state the importance and necessity of situational analysis as guide to intervention;
2. describe the tools and the steps used for situational analysis;
3. plan a situational analysis and intervention for the empowerment of women in a rural
community;
4. explain the importance of evaluation as part of an intervention project;
5. differentiate between qualitative and quantitative analysis of data obtained from study
of intervention project in women education;
6. list with justification the digital skills that students may use for their evaluations; and
7. identify the challenges that students/workers may encounter carrying out intervention
and evaluations in women education.
Course Contents
The importance of research, the use of situational analysis for planned, targeted interventions
followed by evaluations in women education. Discussion of concepts and of the tools for step
by step investigation for situational analysis, interventions and evaluations. Qualitative and
quantitative analysis. Construction of instruments for evaluation. Actual reports for review.
Practical online or telephone interview of an NGO, government or IDP group that carried out
the project.
EAE 461: Personnel Management and Industrial Relations (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. define personnel management;
2. identify how to enhance personnel capacity and establish the relationship between
motivation and training to job satisfaction, staff output and staff turnover;
3. discuss manpower planning, recruitment and training strategies and explain methods of
administration of personnel’s promotions, incentives, commendations and awards;
4. discuss the concepts of industrial relations, operation, management and incorporation;

Education 79 New
5. identify essential soft skills and social capital required to foster good industrial relations
among stakeholders in industry;
6. highlight the strategies and principles of industry public relation; and
7. explain the roles of marketers, agents and sales representatives in industrial relations.
Course Contents
Concepts of organizational management in relation to personnel and capacity. Principles,
strategies, practices and specific techniques ofpersonnel management within the context of
manpower planning, recruitment and training of personnel, personnel welfare and
development, administration of promotion, incentives, commendations and awards. Concepts
of industrial relations, operation, management and incorporation. The development and
utilization of soft skills and social capital to foster good industrial relations among stakeholders.
Processes and guidelines for the recruitment and engagement of marketers, agents,
distributors and sales representatives, public relation principles and strategies.
EAE 462: Labour Studies, Collective Bargaining and the History of the Nigerian Labour Movement (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. define trade and labour unions;
2. describe labour laws and highlight their relevance to industrial harmony;
3. identify the types and the causes of grievances in industry; 4. mention how to manage
conflicts in industry;
5. highlights steps to resolving labour disharmony in industry.
6. discuss the establishment of NLC and list its mandates ;
7. identify the roles of NLC in industrial matters in Nigeria;
8. enumerate some of the achievements of NLC since inception and highlight its relevance in
the Nigerian Labour space; and
9. explain some of the challenges confronting the labour union suggest ways of addressing
them.
Course Contents
Global capital strategies and trade union responses. Public sector labour laws and collective
bargaining. Labour management. Managing industrial grievances, conflicts and strikes, and
their effects on industrial productivities. Conflict resolution steps and strategies in the
workplace.An overview of the antecedents and activities of labour unions in Nigeria.The history
and politics of the Nigeria Labour Congress (NLC) in Nigeria, its mandates, evolution, modus
operandi, and role in industrial matters. The achievements, challenges and relevance of NLC
in Nigeria.
EAE 471: Economics of Distance Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. explain the relationship between education and economic growth;
2. describe the concept of human capital formation and development;
3. highlight indices of human resources development and social and political indicators; and

Education 80 New
4. discuss the financing of distance education and the impact on quality and effectiveness
of Distance Education.
Course Contents
Analysis of cost of distance education and its match with returns in the short and long terms.
Distance education and economic growth, human-capital as well as the indices of human
resources development. The context of the classical school of thought, the concept of capital
formation in relation to distance education and economic growth. Income and literacy. Social
and political indicators. Production functions and quality of labour. Management, financing,
clientele and the resultant impact on the costing and effectiveness of distance education
programmes.
EAE 472: Management of Distance Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. discuss the concept of management and highlight the core rationales, assumptions and
general principles of programme management;
2. relate the general principles of management to the management of distance Education
and describe various approaches to managing distance education programmes;
3. outline the importance of African values in the context of managing distance Education
facilities and discuss ways of implementing these values;
4. discuss the different motivational strategies available to the manager of a distance
Education programme and the importance of motivating workers, facilitators,
practitioners and learners in distance education programmes;
5. discuss the scope, skills and characteristics of personnel management in distance
education and highlight the role of the personnel manager in a distance education
institution;
6. explain the status of public funding of distance education in Nigeria and articulate the
financial management accountability requirements;
7. highlight the role of a manager in financial management of distance education and
explain the budget preparation process; and
8. outline innovative ways of raising funds for distance education.
Course Contents
Basic concepts of management in relation to open and distance education. Exploration of
various approaches to managing distance education programmes. Importance of African
values in the context of managing distance education resources- personnel, facilities and
finance, and the ways of implementing these values.Adaptations of management concepts and
practices into the running of distance education programmes. Basic leadership skills relevant
to distance education practicee and the principles of participation and facilitation of
learning.Maintaining a satisfying work force in the management of distance education. The
concept of personnel management within the context of its growth and history, scope, nature
and characteristics, roles, features, skills and types. Principles and approaches to personnel
management as well as policies of personnel management. How funds earmarked for distance
education can be managed for sustainable output. The concepts of financial management and
budgeting, financial management accountability requirements, roles of a manager in financial
management of distance education, budgeting functions and preparation processes, innovative
and alternative ways of raising funds, as well as optimization of the use of financial resources.

Education 81 New
EAE 481: Supervision and Change in Adult Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. describe different styles of supervision;
2. select and justify preferred styles of supervision;
3. discuss how to introduce change ideas to supervisors from below as opposed to change
ideas being introduced above from management; and
4. suggest ways to test acceptability of change.

Course Contents
Concept of supervision, styles of supervision, autocratic/close style, consultancy, general
supervision, attitudes of supervisors in both styles. Effects of consultative supervision,
practicing consultative/general supervision, supervisors’ role in introducing change in adult
education supervisory approaches to introducing change. Introducing change from below:
selling ideas to superiors.
EAE 482: Innovations in Adult Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. enumerate new and emerging practices in Adult Education locally and internationally;
2. discuss characteristics of innovation;
3. factors that enhance and inhibit adoption in Nigeria of new and emerging practices
4. discuss how the Adult Educator can facilitate adoption of new changes in the system; and
5. suggest and justify innovations in practice and tools that can be of benefit in Adult
Education.
Course Contents
New and emerging practices in adult education. Characteristics of innovation. The role of the
adult educator, especially the administrator, in facilitating the adoption of new changes using
s top-down approach into the system. Factors that enhance and prevent the processes of
innovation adoption. Risks of innovations to the innovator, to the consumers of innovations.
In depth study of any recent innovation in the form of practice, tool used in adult education.
