YEAR ONE – FIRST SEMESTER
EDU 111 HISTORY OF EDUCATION IN NIGERIA ( 1 CREDIT) C
 Concept and Rationale of History of Education
 Brief History of Education: Ancient Greek and Roman Education
 African Indigenous System of Education/African Traditional Education
(ATE)
 Islamic Education in Nigeria
 Christian Missionary/Western Education in Nigeria
 Nigerian Education since 1960
Page 16 of 53
 Evolution of Junior Secondary Education in Nigeria
EDU 112 EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY I - CHILD DEVELOPMENT
(2 CREDITS) C
 Meaning and Scope of Education Psychology
 Relevance of Psychology to Teacher Education
 Human Reproduction: Principles of Human Growth and Development
 Stages and Essential Features of Human Growth and Development up to
Adolescent (physical, social, emotional, intellectual and moral).
 Theories of Personality Development (Any two of Sigmund Freud/Psuchoanalytic Theory, Types, Theory and Traits Theory)
 Individual Differences
 Heredity and Environment
EDU 113 PRINCIPLES AND METHODS OF TEACHING JUNIOR SECONDARY
EDUCATION (2 CREDITS) C
 Institutions could schedule this course in the 1st or 2nd semester in Year 1 as
appropriate to their local environment.
 Objectives and Categories of Objectives in the Teaching-Learning
Process:Instructional Objectives, Behavioural Objectives, Expressive
Objectives, etc.
 Formulating Behavioural Objectives
 Principles underlying the Choice of Teaching Methods at the Junior
Secondary Level
 Types of Instructional Methods, Techniques and Approaches in Teaching (At
least two examples are to be selected for treatment from each of the types
below):
 Distinction based on degree of teacher and Student/Pupil Activity.
Type I
 Teacher-Centred Methods: Lecture, Story Telling, Demonstration Methods
etc.
Type II
 Student-Centred or Pupil-Centre Methods:
 Project (Individual/Group), Discovery
 (Individual/Group), Inquiry (Individual/Group),
 Discussion Method, Play Method, etc.
 Differentiation based on degree of Individual Student/Pupil or Group
Involvement.
Type III
 Group Instructional Methods: Story Telling, Lecture, Demonstration,
Discussion, Folklore, etc.
Type IV
Page 17 of 53
 Individual Instructional Techniques: Question and Answer, Tutorial,
Programmed Instruction, Computer-Assisted Instruction, etc.
Type V
 Conventional/Traditional Methods: Story Telling, Lecture, Discovery, Project,
Demonstration Methods etc.
Type VI
 Innovative or New Strategies: Programmed Instruction, Computer-Assisted
Instruction, Discussion, Inquiry Methods etc.
 Methods of Teaching Pop/FLE (Population and family life Education)
including value clarification.
 Preparation and Presentation of Lessons
 Classrooms Management
 Characteristics of a Good Teacher.
YEAR ONE - SECOND SEMESTER
EDU 121 SOCIOLOGY OF EDUCATION FOR JUNIOR SECONDARY
 (1 CREDIT) C
 The Nature and Scope of Sociology of Education
 Socialization, concepts, types and agencies
 The child, the Junior School and group dynamics
 The concepts, attitudes and beliefs of Nigerians about population education
 Improvement of Quality of Life through POP/FLE
 Influence of various social factors on learning processes at JS level
 Social Stratification and School Achievement
 Culture, Social Change and Education
 The Concept of Culture: Cultural Dimensions of JS Education
 The Concept of Social Change; Education as a change agent in Nigeria
 Consequences of Social Change on Nigerian Education
 The Junior Secondary School as a Formal Organization
 Sociological analysis of contemporary issues in JS Education e.g. National
Consciousness, National Integration, Religious Tolerance, Cultism,
Examination Malpractice, Drug Abuse, Riots etc.
EDU 122 INTRODUCTION TO TEACHER EDUCATION FOR JUNIOR
SECONDARY (1 CREDIT) C
 The concept, aims and objectives of Junior Secondary Teacher Education
 The roles of JS teacher (a) in the school (b) as a member of a population group
in Nigeria.
 Concept of profession; Teaching as a profession; Professionalization of
teaching in Nigeria.
 Ethics of the Teaching profession
 Professional organizations in teaching and other fields
Page 18 of 53
 The Status and Profession of Teaching World-Wide: UNESCO/ILO
Provisions.
 Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria (TRCN) and Professionalisation of
Teaching.
 Building up the Ego/image of the would be JS teacher-trainee.
EDU 123 PHILOSOPHY OF EDUCATION FOR JUNIOR SECONDARY
 (1 CREDIT) C
The Relevance and Importance of Philosophy of Education to the Student
Teacher.
Schools of Thought in Philosophy and some leading philosophers and their
implication to Junior Secondary Education
 Naturalism : Rousseau, Herbert Spencer,
 Idealism : Plato, Thomas Aquinas, Hegel
 Realism : Aristotle, Frederick Herbert
 Pragmatism : Dewey, William James
 Existentialism : Camus, Satre, Kier Kegard
 Africanism : Nkrumah, Nyerere, Fafunwa, Majasan etc
Contributions of these philosophers to the practical methodology of Junior
Secondary Education
The Concept of Education
(a) Processes: teaching, training, instruction, indoctrination, cultivation,
facilitation, mentoring, imparting etc.
(b) Philosophy of Nigerian Education: The Evolution and Tenets of
Developmentalism, Goals, Aims and Objectives of Nigerian Education.
Philosophical examination of some concepts in relation to Junior Secondary
Education; e.g. Rationality, Justice, Responsibility, Creativity, Self-reliance, Lifelong Education, Freedom, Democracy, Equality of Educational Opportunities.
Page 19 of 53
EDU 124 THEORY AND PRACTICE OF CHILD-FRIENDLY SCHOOLS
(2 Credits) C
Course Description
This course introduces students to the child friendly concept, its underlying assumptions and key
principles from which the main characteristics of a Child Friendly School (CFS) are derived. It
discusses CFS models as being holistic and based on a concept of quality education that is multidimensional and concerned with the total needs of the child as the central focus and beneficiary
of all education decisions. Quality is conceptualized not merely as good teaching methods and
learning outcomes but also includes considerations of health and nutrition status of learners;
adequacy of available facilities, services and supplies; as well as levels of safety and protection
afforded by the learning environment. These are important not simply as means of supporting
good teaching and promoting learning achievement, but also as goals in their own right and valid
indicators of quality education from a child rights perspective. The piloting of the CFS approach
in Nigeria will also be focused on and where possible students will be encouraged to visit child
friendly schools in their respective states or communities.
Content outline
1. Introduction to Child Friendly schools concept, principles and models
 Definition and characteristics of Child Friendly schools
 Key generic principles of CFS based on the Convention on the Rights of the Child
(CRC): child-centredness democratic participation, inclusiveness.
 Quality as holistic and multi-dimensional
2. Characteristics of a child-friendly school
Principle 1:child rights and inclusive education
Principle 2: effective teaching and learning environments
Principle 3: safe supportive and protective learning environments
Principle 4:healthy and health-seeking learning environments
Principle 5:gender-sensitive learning environments
Principle 6:democratic participation and partnership building
3. The Policy context for CFS in Nigeria: policies that promote the CFS approach
4. Child-Friendly Schools Standards and Indicators for Teacher Education
5. Teacher preparation for CFS: child centred, interactive methodologies based on
constructivist principles and activity-based learner-centred approach
 Application of Constructivism to Teaching and learning
 General Principles of Constructivist Learning
 Characteristics of Constructivist Teaching
 Some Examples of Constructivist teaching Models
6. Facilities required in a Child-Friendly School
7. Resources Required for CFS Teaching and Learning
8. Assessment of Teaching in a CFS
9. Technology in CFS Learning and Teaching
10. Strategies for Mainstreaming CFS concept and principles in Nigeria
Page 20 of 53
EDU 125 EDUCATION PSYCHOLOGY II (HUMAN LEARNING)
(2 CREDITS) C
 Concept of Learning
 Learning Theories and their application in the classroom situation
 Behaviourist theories of learning
 Cognitivist theories of learning
 Constructivist theories of learning
 Transfer of learning; factors affecting learning
 Motivation
 The concepts of Reward and Punishment with emphasis on their practical
application in education
 Memory, Rote-Learning and Over-Learning
 Remembering and Forgetting
 Effects of rural and urban settings on learning, managing of over-crowding
classroom.
YEAR TWO - FIRST SEMESTER
EDU 211 PRACTICUM IN CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT AND SCHOOL
ORGANISATION (1 CREDIT) C
Brief concepts of classroom management and organization
Classroom organization
Classroom leadership
Classroom arrangement
Class control
Class maintenance etc.
Class record keeping
Attendance register
Result master sheet
Report card
Dossier (pupil’s cumulative record)
Syllabus
Diary keeping: (i) scheme of work, (ii) record of work
The Junior Secondary Teacher, instructional materials and the learner
Class discipline
The concept and essence of school public relations
Factors influencing school-public relations
Staff-management relations
Student-staff relations
Parent-staff relations
Junior Secondary School environment
School programme
School performance
School tone
Page 21 of 53
NOTE:
 Students are to practically work on each of the records specified above and submit for
assessment.
 School-public relations aspect should be dramatized for effectiveness.
 Team Work should be encouraged
 The Course should be practical (no written examination)
EDU 212 EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY: THEORY AND PRACTICE
(2 CREDITS) C
 The concept and history of Educational Technology in Nigeria
 The place of Educational Technology in communication and the Teaching –
Learning Processes at the Junior Secondary Level.
 The concept and process of communication
 The concept of Systems Approach to Instruction (SAI) at the Junior
Secondary Level
 Multi-Media in Junior Secondary Education, Major Characteristics of
Educational Media; Use of Multi-Media in promoting
interdisciplinary/integrated studies.
 Computer-Assisted Teaching/Learning at the Junior Secondary Level
 Enter-Educate (Entertainment Education) approach to teaching of POP/FLE at
the Junior Secondary Level.
 Principles and practice of design, production, improvisation, use,
maintenance, storage and retrieval of educational media for the Junior
Secondary Level.
 Community resources in Junior Secondary Education
 Photocopy and video production (with practicals)
 (The CET must be adequately funded to provide all that is required).
Establishment and Organization of Centre for Educational Technology
Introduction
The Centre for Educational Technology (CET) should be a service unit in the School of
Education which acquires, produces and houses instructional resources to facilitate
effective teaching and learning in all the Schools of the College. The unit is to be headed
by a Co-ordinator who must be a specialist in Educational Technology, with a minimum
qualification of Master’s Degree and not less than Senior Lecturer grade. The facilities
should include the following:
 Co-ordinator’s office
 Offices for lecturers
 Offices for technical staff
 Photographic studio
 Colour production laboratory
 Graphic studio
 Micro-teaching laboratory with a control room and a suitable number of booths
 Equipment Repair/Maintenance Workshop
 Projection room
Page 22 of 53
 Computer room
 Workshop for production of instructional materials
 Unit store
Equipment (Hardwares)
 Closed circuit television (CCTV)
 CCTV Monitors (television sets with remote controls)
 Video camera with accessories
 Video player/recorder
 Editing/dubbing machine
 Public address system with accessories
 Slide projectors with accessories
 Opaque projectors with accessories
 Overhead projectors with accessories
 Audio projectors
 Amplifiers
 Microphones
 Photographic camera with accessories
 Tripod stand for video and photographic cameras
 Trolley for equipment
 Floodlights
 Projection screens
 Loud speakers
 Duplicating machines
 Photocopying machines
 Voltage stabilizers
 Power extension box
 White board
 Computer equipment with printers
 Magnetic chalkboards
 Cable satellite facilities
 Film development and printing equipment
 Air-conditioners, refrigerators, etc.
Softwares or Consumables
Slides, audio tapes, video cassettes, diskettes, batteries, extension cables, multi-purpose
plugs, 35mm films, drawing pens, stencils, typing, duplicating and photocopying papers,
cardboard papers, tempo markers, poster colours, overhead transparencies, transparency
pens, pencils, erasers, etc.
Furniture
 Big tables for student’s use
 Stools and chairs for students
 Large cupboards, for storage of materials
 Tables, chairs and shelves for staff use
 Drawing boards for graphics
Page 23 of 53
Safety Devices
 Fire Extinguishers
 Sand buckets
Personnel
 A Co-ordinator who is an Educational Technologist
 Other Educational Technologies
 Secretary
 Computer Operators
 Graphic Artists
 Projectionists
 Video Cameramen
 Computer Technicians
 Store Officer
 Photographers
 Clerk
 Messenger
 Cleaners
Sections
 Graphic section
 Photographic section
 Media access and retrieval section
 Reprographic section
 Equipment repairs/maintenance section
EDU 213 MICRO-TEACHING - THEORY (1 CREDIT) C
 The concept and process of Micro-Teaching
 Relevance of Micro-Teaching to Teacher Education
 Micro-Teaching Practicum with emphasis on teach/re-teach cycles
 Set Induction
 Stimulus Variation
 Planned Repetition
 Reinforcement
 Non-Verbal communication
 Questioning
 Closure
 Evaluation
 Merits and Demerits of Micro-Teaching
EDU 214 INTRODUCTION TO RESEARCH METHODS (1 CREDIT) C
 The Nature and Meaning of Research
 Types of Research
 Typology based on use
Pure Research
Action or Applied Research
Page 24 of 53
 Typology based on form
Historical Research
Descriptive Survey
Experimental Research
 Typology based on kind of evidence and analysis used
Quantitative Research
Qualitative Research
Eclectic or Triangular Research or Multiple Perspectives Research
 The Research Process
 Choice of topics in educational research with emphasis on Junior Secondary
Education
 Review of related literature
 Research Methodology
 Methods of collecting data
i) Quantitative Techniques: Scored (Likert-type) questionnaires, tests,
experiments etc.
ii) Qualitative Techniques: Structured interview, semi-structured interview,
unstructured interview, participant observation, non-participant
observation, use of documents, use of arte-facts or objects, audio and
audio-visual materials.
iii) Reliability and validity of Research Instruments
 Methods of Organising and Analysing Data
i) The Quantitative Approach: frequency counts; percentage and graphs, etc.
ii) Qualitative Techniques: content analysis of textual and non-textual
materials, transcription of interviews, audio and video-materials,
documentary analysis, historical analysis, etc.
Writing a Research Proposal
Writing a Research Report
iii) Bibliography Techniques: References and Citations
EDU 215 Education of Special target Groups 1 Credit Elective
Education of Adults, Women, migrants etc. (Rationale, objectives, principles)
Principles and strategies of Non-formal education
Principles and strategies of Distance education (DE); distance Learning System
(DLS), Open and Distance Education (DE); Distance Learning System (DLS),
Open and Distance Learning (ODL)
Women education: Issues, problems and prospects
Nomadic education principles and practices in Nigeria
Education of migrant fishermen: principles and strategies
Education of other sub-cultural groups e.g. traders, artisans etc.
Page 25 of 53
YEAR TWO - SECOND SEMESTER
EDU 221 CURRICULUM STUDIES I (1 CREDIT) C
 Meaning and scope of Curriculum
 Basic Curriculum concepts, the Curriculum as a teaching plan
 Types of Curriculum
 Typology based on design
Broad fields/integrated curriculum
Core curriculum
Single Subjects/Discrete Subject Curriculum
 Typology based on official recognition
Official or formal curriculum
Informal/Hidden curriculum
 Typology based on Teacher-Learner Perspectives
Teacher-centred curriculum
Student-centred or Pupil-centred curriculum or Activity curriculum etc.
 Other Common Classifications or types
 History of Junior Secondary Curriculum Development in Nigeria
 Agencies of Junior Secondary Curriculum Development
 Junior Secondary Curriculum Agencies: Agencies of curriculum
planning/innovation in Nigeria
 (Federal/State Ministries of Education and Curriculum Development Centres;
WAEC, NECO, NERDC, NUC, NCCE, NBTE, CON, STAN, etc.
EDU 222 MEASUREMENT AND EVALUATION (2 CREDITS) C
Meaning and Scope of Measurement and Evaluation
Function of Measurement and Evaluation for Teachers
Demographic data collection and analysis
Uses of tests, common dimension for classifying tests at Junior Secondary Level
Teacher-Made Tests, standardized tests, validation of evaluation instruments,
Basic statistics, measures of central tendency, spread, dispersion or variability,
census and vital registration in Junior Secondary Education.
Continuous Assessment in Junior Secondary Education: meaning, scope,
principles, prospects and problems
Construction, use and interpretation of Norm-Referenced Tests and CriterionReferenced Tests for the Junior Secondary Level.
Examination Ethics
Assessment of the non-cognitive domains at the Junior Secondary Level
a) Observation techniques, checklists and rating scale
b) Self-reporting techniques (interview, questionnaires, inventory)
c) Socio-metric techniques
d) Projective techniques EDU 223 MICROTEACHING PRACTICUM (1 CREDIT) C
This should be handled in the Department of Curriculum and Instruction of
School of Education. Every academic staff in the college should be involved.
(This is the practical component of EDU 213)
Page 26 of 53
EDU 224 EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION, PLANNING AND SUPERVISION
 (2 CREDITS) C
Concept of organization; types of organizations
Concept of Administration/Educational Administration and Management
General Principles of Administration
Resource Management and Junior Secondary school records
Population and related data for Educational Planning and Administration
The control of Junior Secondary Education in Nigeria
Discipline in Junior Secondary Schools
Programme Planning in Junior Secondary Schools (Budgeting, sports,
examinations, founders’ day etc.)
Financing Junior Secondary Education
Leadership and leadership styles
Education laws and regulations.
Concept and purposes of Junior Secondary School supervision.
Types of supervision/inspection at the Junior Secondary Level:
 Full inspection
 Routing inspection
 Follow up visits
 Sampling and survey visits
 Special visits
 Internal supervision – by Principal, Vice Principal, Heads of Departments,
Class Teachers, Student Officers, Senior Students, Personnel Supervision, etc.
 Qualities of a good supervisor
 Traditional and modern supervisory methods
 Principles of supervision
 Challenges/Problems of Junior Secondary School supervision in Nigeria
EDU 225 INTRODUCTION TO SPECIAL EDUCATION (1 CREDIT) C
 Historical development of Special Education with particular reference to
Nigeria.
 National Policy on Education and Special Education
 Types of exceptionalities
 Causes, characteristics, identification, intervention strategies and procedures
 Attitudes and beliefs, philosophy of education for exceptional children
 General problems associated with each type of exceptionality as well as
symptoms
 Inclusive Education:-
- Implementation of Inclusive Education
- Interdisciplinary collaboration in Inclusive Classroom
- Creating and Managing Inclusive Classroom
- Methodology in Inclusive ClassroomYEAR THREE - FIRST SEMESTER
EDU 311 TEACHING PRACTICE (6 CREDITS) C
This course is compulsory for all students registered for the NCE programme. It
is one Semester duration to be run at a stretch from the beginning of the First
Semester Year Three to the end. The important areas of emphasis include:
 Instructional planning and studies in teaching methods;
 Instructional technology;
 Micro-teaching mentoring (Model Teaching, Assessment, Feedback Reports
etc)
 A minimum of ten supervisors per student before final computation of each
student’s TP score;
 Posting of students to schools where they can practice their major courses of
study.
Note: Please study Handbook on the Management of Teaching Practice in
NCE awarding Institutions for guide.
YEAR THREE - SECOND SEMESTER
EDU 321 CURRICULUM STUDIES II (1 CREDIT) C
 The Curriculum Process
 Planning
 Development
 Implementation
 Evaluation
 Curriculum development strategies for Junior Secondary Education
 Curriculum Research
 Curriculum Innovation
EDU 322 ADOLESCENT PSYCHOLOGY (1 CREDIT) C
 Meaning and Scope of Adolescent Psychology
 Theories of Adolescence
 Growth and Development during Adolescence:
 Physical
 Moral
 Social
 Intellectual
 Emotional
 Educational implications of early and late maturation
 Development tasks of the Adolescent
Page 28 of 53
 Adolescent concerns and problems: drug abuse, sexuality, school adjustment,
religion and politics, examination malpractice, cultism, riots, armed robbery,
etc.
 Challenges of the adolescent in the home, school and society
 Educational interventions during adolescence: Approaches, Strategies and
Counselling.
EDU 323 RESEARCH PROJECT (2 CREDITS) C
All students registered for the NCE programme are expected to complete an
original research project before a certificate can be awarded. The project may be
in the area of the students’ teaching subjects or General Education. Only one
project may be written in Education or in the student’s major teaching subject.
Projects can be written individually or in groups of not more than 5 students. The
project must be closely supervised by a qualified staff of the Department and
assessed by the competent external assessor appointed by the Department from
outside the College. The score is to be recorded and computed in the School of
Education.
EDU 324 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF GUIDANCE
AND COUNSELLING (1 CREDIT) C
Concept of Guidance and Counseling, distinctions and goals
History and development of Guidance and Counseling practices in Nigeria
Theories of counseling
Ethics of the counseling profession
Guidance Services in Schools
Communication skills in Guidance
Study skills
Health counseling, e.g. AIDS, Drug Abuse, Alcoholism, smoking etc.
Tests in Guidance and Counseling
Career Education and Development; career education in relation to the
labour market.
Sex Education and Marriage counseling
Organization and Administration of Guidance and Counseling
Establishing A Counseling Centre In The School Setting
Introduction
A Counseling Centre is a unit where clients come for counseling on issues that affect them.
These could be educational, vocational or personal/social issues. As such, it is expected that
such a centre should be conducive for free interaction between the counselor and the client. (It is
a service unit for all the schools in the college)
Page 29 of 53
In view of the above, the centre should have the following:
1. Accommodation
A sufficient accommodation sited in a comfortable place (not too open) within the school
setting with enough space for:
 Waiting Room/Secretary/Receptionist room
 Counseling Clinic/Counseling’s Office
 Small Store
 Toilet facilities/small room
2. Basic Facilities
 Writing tables and chairs
 Easy chairs with side stolls
 Cabinet and book shelves
 Curtains for the windows
 Refrigerator
 Radio/Tape Recorder
 Computer with accessories
 Stationeries (Files, Register, Exercise Books, Biros, etc.)
 Psychological tests and other test materials (such as Student Problem Inventory (SPI),
Vocational Interest Inventory (VII), Adolescent Personal Data Inventory (APDI),
Student Habit Inventory (SHI), intelligence tests, etc.
3. Personnel
 At least two professional counselors
 A Secretary/Clerk
 Receptionist
 Messenger/Cleaner
4. Maintenance
 Each College is encouraged to set-up and maintain the centre
Key
SPI - Student Problem Inventory
VII - Vocational Interest Inventory
APDI - Adolescent Personal Data Inventory, etc
SHI - Student Habit Inventory
EDU 325 Introduction to Adult and Non-formal Education 1 Credit E
Nature and Scope of Adult education
Adult Education in Nigeria: Problems and Prospects
Characteristics of the Adult Learner
Methods and materials of teaching Adult Learners
Adult education and Human Resources Development in Nigeria
Adult Education and National Development in Nigeria: Community, political,
socio-economic etc.
Types of Adult Education Organizations
Cross-Cultural comparison or Adult education programmes.
