LIT 104: Introduction to Poetry (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should have acquired the basic techniques and
principles for comprehending basic poetic forms and traditions of all traditions
Course Contents
Poetry as a literary genre. Poetic forms and traditions (narrative, dramatic and lyrical
and ode). The epic traditions, romance and panegyric poetry

LIT 105: Introduction to Prose Literature (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. establish the influences and impact of the English novel on the African and
Nigerian novels; and
2. appreciate the distinctive features context between the English and African.

Course Contents
Origins of the English novel and its adaptation in Africa. Basic characteristic
features of the English novel. Distinctive features of English and African novels.
Major theories and criticisms of fiction.

LIT 106: Introduction to Drama (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should have
1. understood the performance elements in African drama different from the
western classical notion; and
2. be able to identity African Theatre and Drama scholars and their proposition of
the tenets of African drama.
Course Contents
Introduction to drama as a literary genre. Origins and evolution of drama from
rituals to festivals, great classical drama to modern English drama. Forms of
drama in Africa; comedy, total theatre. Dramatic traditions and major
proponents of the traditions. 

LAS 244: Method I-Teaching Grammar, Lexis and Oracy Skills (2 Units C: LH15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. practise habits of correct pronunciation;
2. teach correct pronunciation;
3. recognise linguistic and cultural impediments to correct English usage in ESL
classrooms;
4. practise performance in speech making;
5. discriminate sounds in isolated word forms;
6. produce intonation patterns;
7. discriminate stress patterns within words;
8. recognise variation in stress in connected speech;
9. apply different methods and techniques to the teaching of grammar, lexis, and
oracy skills;
10. express information implicitly; and
11. mention communicative functions of sentences and utterances.
Course Contents
The concepts of Nigerian English and Standard English and a description of
English as a Second Language (ESL). Review of the English curriculum for
secondary schools and general language methods - grammar translation,
direct, audio-lingual, cognitive code learning, functional – notional and
communicative competence. Teaching grammar, lexis and phonology
highlighting the general principles and techniques paying particular attention
to the teaching of each level’s descriptive units. Highlight and pay attention to
perceived areas of difficulty for L2 learners. Teaching oracy skills - listening and
speaking. Lesson preparation and microteaching.

LAS 245: Method II-Teaching Literacy Skills and Literature (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. define literacy in its various forms;
2. explain the inter-connectivity of reading and writing;
3. identify reading processes, components, levels, skills and methods;
4. monitor students’ comprehension;
5. identify the rules of summary writing;
6. apply the rules of summary writing;
7. apply different methods and techniques to teach reading and comprehension at
different levels;
8. identify the series of writing skills with corresponding teaching methodology;
9. apply different methods to teach different types of essay; and
Education 438 New
10. apply the knowledge about literacy to reading in other subjects.
Education 439 New
Course Contents
Definition of literacy in its various forms- information literacy, media literacy,
computer literacy, digital literacy, numerical literacy, health literacy, financial
literacy, cultural literacy, and emotional literacy/physical literacy). Reading
levels- reading readiness, beginning, developmental and advanced. Appropriate
methods and techniques of teaching different reading levels -phonics, look and
say, sentence, context, language experience, eclectic, skimming, scanning,
intensive and extensive reading. Reading components. Interconnectivity of
reading and writing. Monitoring comprehension. Summary writing rules.
Different forms of writing and composition- principles, technical details.
Techniques of writing -guided writing, controlled writing and free writing. Essay
types. Writing exercises-re-ordering and completion. Teaching literature-aims,
the genres and relevance. Approaches and methods - reading aloud,
questioning, discussion, literary criticism and testing literature.

ENG 201: An Introduction to Morphology and Syntax (2 Units C: LH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should possess knowledge of the principles,
structures and systems of the English Language.
Course Contents
Basic principles and practices of syntactic models. English as functional systemic
models - traditional, structuralist. Transformational-generative grammatic
forms. Essential elements of tense and concord.

ENG 203: Introduction to General Phonetics and Phonology I (2 Units C: LH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. apply the phonology and classifications of various languages.
2. apply them to the teaching of English in Nigeria.
Course Contents
Principles of phonetics and phonology description and taxonomy. Practical exercises
from a variety of languages with English teaching as focus.

ENG 204: Introduction to General Phonetics and Phonology II (2 Units C: LH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. use phonetics of sound systems of various languages practically.
2. distinguish them from English Language in communication.
Course Contents
This course extends the horizons of ENG 203 with more practical examples. Advancing
application of phonetic and phonological principles. Practical laboratory exercises on
languages in the context of English teaching.

ENG 205: Advance English Composition I (2 Units C: LH 45)
Education 440 New
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should have acquired
1. acquire technical tools for writing in special and professional situations; and
2. develop distinctive registers and styles for special writing, including scholarly writing,
protocol writing and journalistic and media composition.
Course Contents
Specialized composition writing, specialized essays (reports, long essays,
minutes and invitations). Feature articles, magazines, journals, monographs
and language use on technical matters.

ENG 207: Varieties of English (Including English based Pidgins and Creoles) (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. state and utilize English of various ages;
2. state the impact of the internationality of the English language; and
3. express the impact of regional and contextual situations on the standard English
usage.
Course Contents
Development of the English Language: a diachronic study from old English to
contemporary world English usage. Social Linguistic factors in the development of
English Language.

ENG 209: Language and Society (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. apply the English Language to various social genders, educational and political
settings; and
2. identify and deploy the English Language and the usage in various context and
situations.
Course Contents
Language in a social context. Linguistic and social categories of language.
Grammar of social interactions and movements such as. Womanism, feminism,
maxisism gender and others. Language change, attitude, identity, and
education. Language and social economic categories. Multilingualism.

ENG 211: English Morphology (2 Units C: LH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should master the word structures and their
various applications in various contexts.
Course Contents
Education 441 New
English morphological processes and patterns. English derivatives (inflection, blending,
clipping and acronyms). 

LAS 324: Issues in Language Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. define language ;
2. identify the features of human language ;
3. state the relevance and importance of language and language education;
4. describe the nature of language and structure;
5. describe the socio-linguistic classifications and functions of language (L1, L2,
Foreign Language and Lingua Franca);
6. discuss language provisions in the National policy on Education;
7. list the factors influencing language teaching and learning;
8. differentiate between bilingualism and multilingualism in different cultural
contexts;
9. identify interference and attitudinal issues in language pedagogy;
10. discuss language problems in developed and developing nations with special
reference to Nigeria, Anglo and Francophone countries;
11. identify language learning problems and disabilities; and
12. mention language development agencies in Nigeria and discuss their
contributions.
Course Contents
The nature of language and implications for language teaching and learning.
The position of language (English, French, Nigerian languages, Arabic) in the
education system. Language education policy in Nigeria and other developed
and developing countries. Different perspectives on the relationship between
research and educational policy in relation to the teaching and learning of
language. Key converging and diverging issues for language teaching
professionals in a range of educational and geographical contexts. Exploring
innovative practices within language education, - learner autonomy, selfaccess, distance learning, use of new technologies, collaborative learning and
classroom-based practice. Language planning, policy and diversity interface.
Contemporary issues and debates in multiculturalism,
multilingualism/bilingualism, and their interrelationships with curricula and
assessment in language education.
Education 445 New

LAS 348: Theories of Learning Applied to Language Education (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. define theory;
2. explain the importance of theory;
3. explain psychological foundations of education in relation to language pedagogy;
4. identify the major theories of language learning and the proponents;
5. discuss the implications of theories to language pedagogy.
Course Contents
Definition of theory and its importance. Facts about the conditions and
circumstances under which learning takes place. Psychological foundations of
language arts. The major psychology theories that influence language
pedagogy- major schools -stimulus response Association Theories (J.B Waston,
Ivan P. Pavlov, E.L. Thorndike, E.R. Guthrie, B.F. Skinner and C. Hull) and
Cognitive insight theories (W. Kohler, K. Lewin, E. Tolman, J.S. Brunner and
D.P. Ausbel) other theories such as functionalism, psychodynamics and the
probabilistic theories of the model builders. Implications for language
pedagogy.

ENG 302: Phonology of English (3 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. Understand the nature of sounds and their behaviours in speech contexts;
2. deploy English sounds and written nuances to construction and composition of
speech and essays and various forms of writing
Course Contents
Approached to phonology, prosody and generative to English language study.
Concrete organization of discuss aided with appropriate practical courses.
Advancing student perception and production of sounds.

ENG 303: Introduction to Applied Linguistics (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. apply the structure of languages to construction and language competence
to technical specialized situations such as computer technology and artificial
intelligence situations; and
2. detect causes and resolutions of speech defect in language use.
Course Contents
Application of linguistic knowledge to language phenomena. Analysis:
contrastive, error, discuss and performance. Acquisition of language in L1 and
L2 situations. Language teaching, learning and testing. Deploying practical
:
Education 446 New
relevance of linguistics to computer language instruction speed effect and
artificial intelligence.

ENG 304: Introduction to Semantics (3 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should have:
1. gained competence in writing and composition making, various types of meaning
from word and sentence structures; and
2. develop distinctive styles of writing through meaning generation competence
from theories of meaning derived from word phrase sentence clusters of
grammar.
Education 447 New
Course Contents
Sense properties and sense relations in semantics; Word versus sentence
meaning and semantic markedness; General framework of linguistic semantics;
Basic semantic theories (Componential analysis, meaning postulates and
general transformational generative semantics).

ENG 305: The English Language in Nigeria (2 Units C: LH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course students should be able to
1. differentiate between Nigerian Englishes and their influence on standard English;
2. identify the distinctive character of Nigerian English and standard English and
using them at the appropriate context.
Course Contents
History of English in Nigeria. Emergence of Englishes and the evolution of a
Nigerian standard. Distinctive properties of Nigerian Languages and their
impact on performance in standard English.

ENG 306: Discourse Analysis (2 Units C: LH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should have gained competence in analysis
and criticism of text and composition of speeches and writings in specialized
situations like advertisements tributes cartoons and courtesies.
Course Contents
Principles and practice of Discourse analysis. Features of Coherence and
cohesion. Functions of linking devices and intra and inter sentential paragraph
devices in text. Text description such as advertisement, obituary cartoons
greetings.

ENG 307: The Sociolinguistics of English (2 Units C: LH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. understand the political usages of English languages in various political contexts;
2. develop English language registers appropriate to Nigeria situation and context
such as technological register for technological findings and innovation; and
3. make proposition for the development of a national language through indigenous
languages
Course Contents
Basic introduction to the history methodology, theory and application of social
linguistics. Differentiation of English in post-colonial situations like Nigeria.
English and Multilingualism. English and Globalization. English and National
Development. English in a second language context. English as lingual
franca/official language.
:
Education 448 New
Education 449 New

LIT 308: Creative Writing II (2 Units C: LH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should write a one act play, slim volume
of poems and novelette.
Course Contents
Intensive practical course in creative writing (Continuation of LIT 210). Active
creative works by students on the major literary genre.
