LAS 402: Entrepreneurship in Language Education (2 Units C LH 15;
PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. define entrepreneurship in language education;
2. state the importance of entrepreneurship in language education;
3. give examples of entrepreneurship in language education;
4. discuss the characteristics of successful entrepreneurs;
5. state the advantages of entrepreneurship in language education;
6. identify the modalities for planning entrepreneurial ventures;
7. explain the types of entrepreneurship in language education;
8. identify the factors affecting entrepreneurship in language education;
9. apply the rule to practice entrepreneurship in language education; and 10.
examine case studies of successful entrepreneur in language education.
Course Contents
The concept of entrepreneurship in language education. The potentials of
language education for entrepreneurship ventures. Resource based views on
educators and entrepreneurs. Opportunities provided by individual and small or
mass business entrepreneurial initiatives in language educationplanning/organising events, translation of scripts, training in public lectures,
editing, staff recruitment, home tutors, virtual classrooms, remedial classes,
literacy centres, speech therapist, reading consultants and school
establishment consultancy.

ENG 402: Pragmatics (2 Units C LH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. understand the functions and behaviors of the English Language and their
sociocultural implications;
2. interpret the theories of English and apply them in national context.
Course Contents
Scope, goals and principles of pragmatics (Relate to ENG 304). Utterance
Meaning versus Sentence Meaning. Sociocultural and linguistic rules.
Determining interpretation presupposition and context. Locution and
parloucution speech acts. Theories of pragmatics

ENG 403: Psycholinguistics (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students
1. should have acquired competences in the meaning structure and impact of the
English language on the African experience and African psyche;
2. be able to identify and correct defects in language usage based on physical
challenges including tools for language understanding and usage by the mentally
challenged citizens; and
3. be able to help mentally or physically challenge in understanding and usage of
English language in communication.
Course Contents
Psycholinguistics account of language and relationship between language and
the mind. Language acquisition and language learning. Language thinking and
cognition. Language and the mental process. Language localization, linguistic
performance and behavior. Language behavior, production and
comprehension. Language impairments

ENG 404: Multilingualism (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to
1. appreciate the role of the English language and its impact on the development of
indigenous languages; and
2. contribute to the growth and development of indigenous language and viability
for survival outside of the English language dominance in Nigeria.
Course Contents
General and English specific multilingualism. English in multilingual African and
other continents. Language choice, minority language, language planning and
management. Nigerian multilingual context and the role of English and Nigeria’s
indigenous languages.

ENG 405: English for Specific Purposes (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course students should be able to
1. develop English Language effective usage in various technical vocational
circumstances; and
2. establish the character, form and nature of English for academic purposes such
as thesis writing, academic essay writing and others.
Course Contents
Adoption of English for particular purpose and circumstances. English for Academic
purposes. Short projects through field work. This is for english department.
