LIS 111: Introduction to Library and Information Science (3 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. define the basic concepts in the course;
2. discuss the relationship between library science and information science;
3. explain the philosophical foundations of the course;
4. explain its origin, growth and development;
5. discuss the contributions of great scholars to the field;
6. mention the need for its study and practice;
Education 824 New
7. discuss LIS education in Nigeria;
8. explain the relationship between LIS and other fields; and
9. discuss the future of the course.
Course Contents
Definition of terms: Library, information, library science, information science and others.
Relationship between library and information science. Theoretical and philosophical
foundations of library and information science. Origin, growth and development of library and
information science. Contributions of great scholars to library and information science. Need
for the study and practice of library and information science. Library and information science
education in Nigeria. Relationship between LIS and other fields of study. The future of library
and information science.
LIS 114: Introduction to Digital Libraries (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. define the basic concepts in the course;
2. explain the origin and development of digital libraries;
3. identify the components of digital libraries;
4. enumerate the services of digital libraries;
5. explain the uses of digital libraries; and
6. discuss their advantages and disadvantages.
Course Contents
Definition of concepts: digital libraries, electronic libraries, virtual libraries, library without
boundaries and others. Origin and development of digital libraries. Components of digital
libraries: hardware, software, personnel, information resources and others. Services of digital
libraries. Uses of digital libraries. Advantages and disadvantages of digital libraries.
LIS 125: Introduction to Library Application Packages (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. define the basic concepts in the course;
2. identify types of library application packages;
3. discuss the different categories of library application packages and what they are used
for;
4. describe the features of library application packages; and
5. explain the limitations of library application packages.
Course Contents
Definition of terms-programs, software, application packages and others. Types of library
application packages, such as VTLS, CD/ISIS, EOSIS Q Series,x-Lib. Open source packages,
such as Koha, Greenstone and othersc. Packages for institutional repositories such as Dspace,
Fedora, Eprint and others. Features of library application packages. Uses of library application
packages. Limitations of library application packages. 

LIS 211: Introduction to ICT in Library and Information Services (2 Units C: 30 LH)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. define basic concepts in the course;
2. explain the concept of library automation;
3. discuss ICT application in different library services;
4. describe information seeking in the electronic environment;
5. explain database use in libraries and information centres;
Education 827 New
6. discuss the Internet as an information resource;
7. explain the concept and design of web page and how to run it;
8. explain ICT application in library and information centre management and promotion;
9. describe digital libraries and open access;
10. explain property rights in the digital age; and
11. discuss the challenges and prospects of ICT application in Nigerian libraries and
information centres
Course Contents
Definition of basic concepts: information, communication, technology, information and
communication technology and others. Introduction to library automation. ICT application to
technical services. ICT application to readers’ services. Information seeking in an electronic
environment. Database use in libraries and information centres. The Internet as an information
resource Web page concept and design. Getting a web page up and running. ICT application
in library management and promotion. Digital libraries and open access. Intellectual property
rights in the digital age. Challenges and prospects of ICT application in Nigerian libraries and
information centres.
LIS 214: Management of Libraries and Information Centres (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. discuss the concept of management from library and information centre perspective;
2. explain delegation of authority, staff committee, library committee and evaluation as
they pertain to management;
3. explain goals setting, developing action plans, budgeting and reporting; 4. discuss how
to manage resources, time, people and money; and
5. explain how to manage specialized library services.
Course Contents
The concepts of management as applied to libraries with reference to the Librarian’s roles,
powers and responsibilities. Delegation of authority. Staff committee. Library committee.
Evaluation. Setting goals and developing action plans. Budgeting. Reporting library activities.
Managing resources, time, people and money. Specialized services management, such like
learning commons, digital libraries and others.
LIS 215: Library and Information Services for Children and Adolescents (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. identify the characteristics, needs and interests of children and adolescents for the
purpose of selecting appropriate information materials;
2. enumerate the effects of media on children and adolescents;
3. explain the relationship between gaming and libraries;
4. discuss how to filter the gamut of information resources to ensure users’ safety;
Education 828 New
5. mention social networking services that are available for children and adolescents;
6. explain how to offer information and media literacy to children and adolescents;
7. enumerate and evaluate digital library resources and services for children and
adolescents;
8. discuss the role of technology on children’s library and information services; and
9. explain future trends in library and information services for children and adolescents
Course Contents
Characteristics, needs and interests of children and adolescents, children’s literature, selection
and materials. Effects of media on children and adolescents from toys to television. Gaming
and libraries. Filtering and child safety. Social networking. Information/media literacy
instruction in children’s libraries. Digital libraries for children. Evaluation of digital resources
for children. Children information behaviour. Global perspectives-technology in young people’s
lives around the world. Future trends.
LIS 216: Serials Management (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. define the basic concepts in the course;
2. explain the role of serials in information dissemination;
3. describe the selection, acquisition, organization storage and dissemination processes of
serials in print, microform and digital formats;
4. enumerate the uses of databases for serials control and dissemination;
5. mention the problems of bibliographic control of serials;
6. explain users’ access to serials through indexing and abstracting services; and
7. demonstrate serials control and access using appropriate software.
Course Contents
Definitions. Role of serials in information dissemination. Selection, acquisition, organization
and storage of serials in print, microforms and digital formats. Use of databases. Problems of
bibliographic control. User access via indexing and abstracting services. Students are required
to have hand-on practical’s on serials management software.
LIS 222: Organization of Knowledge I: Principles of Cataloguing (2 Units C) (LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. define the basic concepts in the course;
2. describe catalogue using AACR2 and RDA;
3. use Library of Congress Subject Headings, Sears List of Subject Headings and Medical
Subject Headings (MeSH);
4. use Dublin Core Metadata Standard Elements and the Minnesota Metadata Guidelines;
5. catalogue non-book materials;
6. explain the application of computers to cataloguing;
7. mention the types of catalogues and their uses; and
Education 829 New
8. explain filing rules and demonstrate their practical application.
Course Contents
Definition of terms: cataloguing, authority file, shelf list, filing rules, subject heading and
otherc. Standard techniques of identification and description of bibliographic units through
descriptive cataloguing using ACCR 2 and RDA. Establishment of subject headings using Sear’s
List of Subject Headings, Library of Congress Subject Headings, Medical Subject Headings of
the National Library of Medicine of the USA and others. Metadata standard sets such like Dublin
Core Metadata Standard sets, Minnesota Metadata Guidelines and others. Cataloguing of nonbook materials. Application of computers to cataloguing with special emphasis on MARC and
related online formats. Types of catalogues and their uses. Filling rules and their practical
applications.
LIS 225: Hardware and Software Technologies (2 Units C: LH 30 )
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students should be able to:
1. define the basic concepts in in the course;
2. identify the various parts of hardware and their uses;
3. discuss network technology;
4. mention the various components of system software and their functions;
5. explain application software, general application software, application specific software;
operating system software, programming languages, telecommunications software
satellite/radio/Tv/Internet communications;
6. discuss the use of LIS packages for library automation;
7. explain electronic library management software, institutional repository management
software and electronic resources management software; and
8. mention and discuss other emerging software and applications
Course Contents
Definition of terms: hardware, software, technology, hardware technology, software
technology, programs, software, application software and others. Types of hardware: input
devices, processing devices, storage devices and others. Network technology and others.
Components of systems software and their functions. Application software. General application
software. application specific software. Operating system software. Programming languages.
Telecommunications software. Satellite, radio, TV and Internet communications. Use of
software packages in LIS integrated library management system software for library
automation. Electronic library management system software, institutional repository
management software. Electronic resources management system software. Any other
emerging software package and application LIS 311: Organization of Knowledge II (3 Units C: LH 15; 45 LH)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. define the basic concepts of the course;
2. explain the historical developments of classification schemes;
3. enumerate the different types of classification schemes;
4. discuss the roles and significance of classification schemes in libraries and information
centres;
5. classify with at least two general classification schemes and one special scheme in use
in Nigerian libraries and information centres;
6. do practical subject analysis;
7. classify with online facilities like Worldcat, LC Catalog Online and others;
8. do practical subject organization of collections and indexes;
9. identify the problems of classifying African materials in the major classification schemes
with emphasis on Nigeria; and
10. design an in house classification scheme.
Course Contents
Definition of terms: classification, schemes of classification, classification schedule. Historical
development of classification schemes. Types of classification schemes such as general
classification schemes like LC, DDC, UDC, Bliss, Colon and subject schemes like Elizabeth Moi’s
scheme for law and others. Significance and roles of classification schemes in libraries and
information centres. Details and practical exercises with at least two popular general schemes
and one popular specialized scheme in use in Nigeria. Subject analysis. Classifying with online
facilities like Worldcat, LC Online Catalog and many others. Subject organization of collections
and indexes (call marks). Problems of classifying African materials in using standard
classification schemes with emphasis on Nigeria. Designing an in-house classification scheme.
Education 833 New
LIS 312: Collection Management (2 Units C: LH 14; PH 45)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. discuss the principles and methods of building library collections;
2. identify the criteria for evaluating library materials;
3. explain the relationship of the selection process to user requirements and other library
procedures such as book review, the relationship of the publishing industry and collection
management;
4. discuss the development of special collections such as non-print materials, cartographic
materials and musical materials;
5. explain the problems of collection management in Nigerian libraries and information
centres; and
6. identify the problems of acquiring Africana materials.
Course Contents
Examines the principles and methods of building library collections in all types of libraries
including formulation of selection policy. Criteria for evaluating materials and the relationship
of selection process to user requirements and to other library procedures. Includes the problem
of censorship, the art of the book review, and the relationship of the publishing industry to
collection management. Development of special collections such as non-print. Problems of
collection development in Nigeria libraries and information centres. Problems of acquisition of
Africana are covered.
LIS 313: Reference and Information Services (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45 )
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. explain the evolution, theory and objectives of reference and information services;
2. enumerate and explain different types of reference questions;
3. identify the tools for offering reference and information services;
4. enumerate the qualities reference and information services personnel should possess;
5. explain the techniques of literature searching;
6. identify types of reference and information services;
7. explain abstracting and indexing, current awareness, selective dissemination of
information, and translation services;
8. explain reference and information services as performed indifferent types of libraries;
9. discuss organization and evaluation of reference and information services;
10. explain reference and information ser vices in the digital environment;
11. establish the status of reference and information services in Nigerian libraries; and 12.
do practical reference work
Course Contents
Evolution, theory and objectives of reference and information services. Reference questions.
Tools for offering reference and information services. Reference and information services
personnel. Techniques of literature searching. Types of reference and information services.
Education 834 New
Abstracting and indexing services. Current awareness. SDI and translation services.
Reference and information services in different types of libraries. Organization and evaluation
of reference and information services. Reference and information services in the digital
environment. Status of reference and information services in Nigerian Libraries.

LIS 321: Preservation, Conservation and Security of Library and Information Resources (2 Units C: 30 LH)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, students are expected to:
1. define the various concepts of the course;
2. enumerate the various disaster and security issues in libraries and information centres;
3. describe how to manage them, as well as the current trends in practice, especially with
regard to electronic resources;
4. identify the body of literature on how to ameliorate the problems of preservation,
conservation, security and disasters in libraries and information centres; and
5. identify institutions with good practices in preservation, conservation, security, disaster
preparedness and control.
Course Contents
Basic concepts of preservation, conservation and security. Causes of deterioration of
information sources. Preservation, conservation and security strategies in libraries and
information centres. Significance of preservation, conservation and security of information
sources. Types of disasters and security issues in libraries and information centres. Disaster
and security management in libraries and information centres. Current trends in preservation,
conservation and security of library and information resources. Preserving, conservation and
securing electronic information systems and resources in libraries and information centres.
Exploration of the body of knowledge related to ameliorating the problems of preservation,
conservation of security in libraries and information centres. Identification of institutions with
good preservation, conservation, security and disaster preparedness and control practices.
LIS 329: Field Experience (SIWES) (6 Units C: PH 270)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. carry out practical work in all aspects of library and information services; and
2. write and submit a report on their practical experiences
At least six months of supervised field experience in any approved library and information
centre in Nigeria, undertaken during the long vacation. 

LIS 413: Indexing and Abstracting (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcome
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. define the basic concepts in the course;
2. explain the concepts and methods of indexing and abstracting;
3. design and update a thesaurus;
4. enumerate types of indexes and abstracts;
5. explain the workings of indexing and abstracting services, both print and electronic;
6. evaluate indexes and abstracts; and
7. apply practical knowledge of indexing and abstracting.
Education 836 New
Course Contents
Concepts and methods of indexing and abstracting. Design and updating of thesaurus. Types
of indexes and abstracts. Indexing and abstracting services including electronic data bases.
Evaluation of indexes and abstracts. Practice application.
LIS 416: Archives Administration & Records Management (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. define the key concepts of the course;
2. explain the life cycle of records; and
3. discuss archival activities and processes with regard to theory and practice.
Course Contents
Discusses the life cycle of records as well as records continuum and covers records creation.
Maintenance of records disposals. Provides an introduction to the archival profession with focus
on theory and practice in the area of appraisal, acquisition, arrangement and description,
references, preservation, exhibitions, outreach and electronic resources.
LIS 417: Publishing, Book Production and Book Trade (2 Units C: LH 30)
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. define the key concepts of the course;
2. provide an outline history of printing and publishing;
3. mention books for different categories of readers;
4. identify the different types of publishers;
5. explain indigenous publishing;
6. mention and explain the nature of book vending;
7. identify and explain the problems of marketing and distribution of books;
8. explain manuscript development and editing;
9. identify and explain author-publisher marketing and promotion techniques;
10. discuss intellectual property laws;
11. explain the use of modern technologies in publishing; and
12. enumerate the problems of publishing in Africa with emphasis on Nigeria
Course Contents
Problems of books publishing in Africa (Nigeria). Books for various categories of readers, the
multi-national publishers. Indigenous publishing. Government and individuals as publishers.
Bookshops and bookselling. Problems of marketing and distribution. A brief outline history of
printing and publishing from the earliest times to the present day. Manuscript development
and editing. Author-publisher marketing and promotion techniques. Intellectual property law.
Use of new technologies in publishing. Problems of publishing in Nigeria.
LIS 421: Database Design and Management (2 Units C: LH 15; PH 45)
Education 837 New
Learning Outcomes
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:
1. define the key concepts of the course;
2. identify types of databases;
3. discuss the scope of database design, database management, database principles for
microcomputers;
4. identify and discuss examples of database applications in library in library and
information fields;
5. explain and demonstrate the processes of database design, creation and maintenance;
6. discuss and demonstrate data dictionary and normalization process;
7. explain user interface and programming concepts;
8. create a workable database system;
9. describe centralized and distributed database system; and
10. execute practical work in database design and management.
Course Contents
Definition of concepts: data, database, database design, database management and others.
Types of databases. Scope of database design. Scope of database management. Database
principles for microcomputers with emphasis on relational database systems (DBMS).
Applications of database development in library and information fields. Database design,
creation and maintenance. Data dictionary and normalization process: 1NF, 2NF3NF
maintenance. The user interface. Programming concepts. Creation of a workable database
system. Centralized and distributed database systems and practical work in database design
and management.
